=== PAGE 3 ===
Author’s Note
Iwasbornin1984. Idon’tquiterememberhowIdiscoveredvideogames,butIdoknowthat
myfirstconsolewasaFamicomclonemadebyabrandthatsoldtheminmycountry. Myaunt
andunclegaveittome,anditbecameoneofthecentersofmylifeforseveralyears. Butone
afternoon,atafriend’shouse,surroundedbyotherfriends(weallwenttothesameschool),I
watchedMortalKombatrunningonaSegaMegaDriveclone. AtthatmomentIknewnothing
aboutconsoles,clones,orcompanies…butIwasfascinated. Itwasabeforeandafter. Iknew
I had to have that at home, no matter what.
Unfortunately, it wasn’t that simple. After wearing her down, my mom bought me a Sega
Genesis(whichI’msurecostherafortune,beingasinglemother;mydadpassedawaywhen
I was about 5 years old). I wore that console out. It literally broke. After that, my interests
keptshifting: I’mapersonwithmanyhobbies,andthey’vespentmywholelifecompetingfor
my time.
Afewyearsago,though,oneofthemturnedintoagoalIhopetoaccomplishsomeday: porting
one of the games I played — first on the NES, and later in arcades — that I always thought
was a shame never got a Genesis release: the arcade TMNT, the first one Konami put out.
Whilelookingforawaytotakeonthismonumentaltask,IfoundSGDKasthetoolandPigsy’s
video tutorials as a companion. I’ll get there someday — I know it’s possible. This manual
was born from that ongoing drive.
I want to thank my mom, Rita, for sacrificing so much to buy me that console back then, and
my wife, Aldana, for putting up with my hobbies. I hope you enjoy this book.
Gustavo Valenzuela
iii

=== PAGE 4 ===
Contents
Author’s Note iii
Acknowledgments 1
Chapter 1 — History, Specifications, and Architecture of the Mega Drive 3
Chapter2—TheVDPinDepth-VRAM,CRAM,VSRAM,Planes,Tiles,andPalettes 6
Chapter 3 — Installing and Configuring the SGDK 2.11 Environment 9
Chapter 4 — Editor, Extension, and Emulators 11
Chapter 5 — First Program - SGDK Project Structure and Compilation 13
Chapter 6 — C Applied to Retro Development - Data Types, Limited Memory, and
Pointers 16
Chapter 7 — How to Display Backgrounds on the Mega Drive 20
Chapter 8 — Creating Graphics with Aseprite 29
Chapter 9 — Scroll and Parallax Scrolling 37
Chapter 10 — H40 and H32 Resolution Modes 47
Chapter 11 — Large Level Maps with MAP_create 52
Chapter 12 — Level Maps with Tiled and TMX Files 57
Chapter 13 — Creating Maps with 16Tile 61
Chapter 14 — Multiple Palettes on the Same Background with 16Tile 67
Chapter 15 — Depth via Tile Priority 77
Chapter 16 — Manually Assigning Tile Priority Without a Script 83
Chapter 17 — Tile Scrolling 95
Chapter 18 — Background Tile Animation 102
Chapter 19 — Complex Level Maps with Aseprite 113
Chapter 20 — Converting Many-Color Images to the Mega Drive Palette 122
iv

=== PAGE 5 ===
Chapter 21 — How to Display Sprites 132
Chapter 22 — Creating Sprites and Animation Sheets 138
Chapter 23 — Sprite Animation 150
Chapter 24 — 2D Camera 155
Chapter 25 — Parallax Scrolling Over a Camera 164
Chapter 26 — Transparency with Shadow and Highlight 169
Chapter 27 — Color Transparency Without Shadow and Highlight 175
Chapter 28 — Ranger X-Style Dynamic Lighting 183
Chapter 29 — Palette Cycling Animations 189
Chapter 30 — Palette Fades 197
Chapter 31 — D-Pad Controls 204
Chapter 32 — Button Controls and Event-Based Reading 212
Chapter 33 — 2-Player Mode 221
Chapter 34 — The Sound Chips - YM2612 and PSG 230
Chapter 35 — Music Playback - XGM and XGM2 Drivers 234
Chapter 36 — Creating Music for the Mega Drive 238
Chapter 37 — Programming Sound Effects 245
Chapter 38 — Creating Sound Effects 250
Chapter 39 — The Resource Compiler in Depth 258
Chapter 40 — Level Collision for a Top-Down 2D Game 263
Chapter 41 — Jump and Gravity for a 2D Platformer 272
Chapter 42 — Level Collision for Larger Sprites 279
Chapter 43 — Semi-Solid Platforms 287
Chapter 44 — DMA - Direct Memory Transfers 294
Chapter 45 — Managing VRAM Limits 300
Chapter 46 — The New SGDK 2.x VRAM Configuration 305
Chapter 47 — Reducing Tiles and Saving VRAM 311
Chapter 48 — Saving VRAM Through Manual Sprite Loading 320
Chapter 49 — Profiling and CPU Load 332
Chapter 50 — VDP Planes and Enemies in a Beat ’em Up 337
v

=== PAGE 6 ===
Chapter 51 — Organizing the Project with Header Files 346
Chapter 52 — Adding Enemies to the Game 354
Chapter 53 — C Structs Applied to Game Entities 362
Chapter 54 — C Enumerations (enums) 369
Chapter 55 — Permanent Enemy Types 374
Chapter 56 — Function Pointers for Enemy AI 381
Chapter 57 — Game States 390
Chapter 58 — Loading Different Enemies per Level 398
Chapter 59 — Preparing Level Graphics 407
Chapter 60 — Transitioning Between Levels in the Game 414
Chapter 61 — Loading a New Level’s Graphics 421
Chapter 62 — Wrapping Up and Extending the Project 430
Chapter 63 — HInterrupts and Raster Effects 433
Chapter 64 — Saving Games - SRAM and Flash Save 440
Chapter 65 — Multitasking and Advanced SGDK 2.x Features 446
Chapter 66 — Raylib as an Alternative for Porting Games to PC 450
Chapter 67 — Scope Note - Sega CD and 32X 456
Chapter 68 — Final Project - BOINGMD, a Pong Clone from Start to Finish 458
vi

=== PAGE 7 ===
Acknowledgments
No manual about a console more than three decades old is written from scratch. This one in
particular exists thanks to the work — often unpaid and sustained over years — of a handful
of people who decided to document, teach, and keep homebrew development for the Sega
Mega Drive alive. Before beginning the journey through its 68 chapters, it’s worth naming
the people who made it possible.
The first thanks go to Stéphane Dallongeville, creator and maintainer of SGDK (Sega Gen-
esis Development Kit), the tool that every line of code in this manual rests on. SGDK turned
what once required programming directly in Motorola 68000 assembly into an accessible C
workflow, without sacrificing the level of hardware control that a Mega Drive project needs.
Maintaining a complete development kit — VDP, DMA, sound, sprites, the resource compiler,
and everything else — for so many years, and for free, is work on a scale that is rarely rec-
ognized enough. Everything explained in Part VI about rescomp, in Part VIII about DMA and
VRAMlimits,andingeneralanyVDP_,SPR_,SND_,orDMA_functionmentionedthroughoutthis
manual exists thanks to that work.
Equally important thanks go to Pigsy, of Pigsy’s Retro Game Dev Tutorials, whose extensive
video series on SGDK development served as the source material from which much of this
manual was compiled and adapted, especially the parts covering graphics, sprites, sound,
collision physics, and the capstone project of an action game with enemies. The screenshots
illustrating the various chapters of this manual are taken from that video series, and are
included here with explicit credit to that authorship. Anyone who wants to dig deeper into
any of the topics covered by this manual, watch the development process on video, or simply
support that work can find the channel and its social media at the following links:
• YouTube: Pigsy’s Retro Game Dev Tutorials
• X / Twitter: @PigsyRetro
• Patreon: Pigsy’s Retro Game Dev Tutorials
ThanksarealsoduetoAndrejPreradovic,of OhsatGames,whoseseriesofSGDKtutorials
— Megapong, Megatiler, Megarunner, and Megalaga, among others — served as an entry
point into Mega Drive programming for a large part of the Spanish- and English-speaking
community for years, at a time when in-depth material of that kind barely existed. The fact
that those tutorials have become outdated as SGDK versions have moved on takes nothing
away from the educational effort they represented, nor from the number of developers who
took their first steps thanks to them; this manual, in fact, adopts some of that same didactic
spirit in trying to stay relevant against future versions of SGDK.
Finally, a more general but no less sincere thanks to the entire ecosystem of the SGDK and
Mega Drive homebrew development community: to those who maintain forums, Discord
servers, and wikis where specific questions about VDP behavior or DMA timing — questions
that appear in no official documentation — get answered; to those who develop and main-
tainthetoolsthismanualrecommendsinPartI—emulatorswithdebuggingcapabilitieslike
GensKModandBlastEm,Tiledasamapeditor,Asepriteforcreatinggraphics,DefleMaskfor
1

=== PAGE 8 ===
music composition, and the “Genesis Code” extension for Visual Studio Code; and to those
who, with flash carts like the ones in the EverDrive family, made it possible to test one’s own
work on real hardware and not just in an emulator. Each of these pieces, small on its own, is
partofwhattogethermakesitpossibletodaytoprogramforaconsolefrom1988withallthe
comforts of modern development.
This manual would not exist without that prior work. What follows is, in large part, a way
of honoring it: bringing together knowledge scattered across videos, articles, and years of
communityexperimentationintoasingleunifiedwork,updatedforSGDK2.11,anddesigned
to guide anyone starting from scratch all the way through.
On Using and Distributing This Manual
Thismanualisfreetouse,copy,anddistribute,inthebroadestsenseoftheword: nopermis-
sionisneeded,therearenorestrictionsonpersonal,educational,orcommunityuse,andyou
can share it with anyone you like at no cost. It is free, and it will stay that way.
That said, if you found it useful and would like to give something back for the work of gath-
ering, updating, and organizing all this material into a single unified work, you can make a
voluntary donation to gustavo221b@gmail.com (PayPal). This is absolutely not required
— to be clear: the manual is, and will remain, free either way — but the option is there for
anyone who wants to use it.
2

=== PAGE 9 ===
Chapter 1 — History,
Specifications, and Architecture
of the Mega Drive
Whathardwareliesbeneaththecode: processors,memory,andthedivisionoflaborthatwill
shape every programming decision in this manual
Before writing a single line of C, it’s worth understanding, even if only in broad strokes, the
machine you’re programming for. This isn’t a trivia chapter: almost every design decision
you’ll make throughout this manual —why 8- or 16-bit data types are used instead of int out
of habit, why there’s no floating point, why sound is programmed separately from the rest of
the game, why you have to manually keep track of how much video memory is being used—
has a concrete reason rooted in the architecture described here. Come back to this chapter
whenever a limitation feels arbitrary: it almost certainly isn’t.
1. A bit of history
SegalaunchedtheMegaDriveinJapanin1988, asthesuccessortothe8-bitMasterSystem.
The console arrived in the United States in 1989 under the name Genesis (a name it kept in
that market for its entire commercial life) and in Europe in 1990, already under the Mega
Drive name. It was the main competitor to the Super Nintendo during the so-called “16-bit
war” of the early 1990s, and it went on to sell more than 30 million units worldwide, with a
catalogthatincludesserieslikeSonictheHedgehog,StreetsofRage,PhantasyStar,Shining
Force, and Golden Axe, plus a huge catalog of arcade conversions.
Over the course of its commercial life, three hardware revisions were manufactured (Mega
Drive 1 in 1988, Mega Drive 2 in 1993, and Mega Drive 3 in 1998), with external and
manufacturing-cost differences but full compatibility with the same game catalog. The
console also had a series of expansions and peripherals: the Mega-CD (a CD reader with
additional graphics and sound hardware) and the 32X (a cartridge with extra processors
aimed at 3D graphics). Neither is within the scope of this manual, which focuses on the
original cartridge-based Mega Drive/Genesis; if you ever move on to developing for those
platforms, much of what you’ll learn here —the VDP, memory organization, the SGDK
workflow— remains the necessary foundation, with additional hardware layered on top.
Before the appearance of modern, free development kits like SGDK, programming for the
Mega Drive required direct knowledge of the main processor’s assembly language and ac-
cess to official, Sega-licensed development kits, which were expensive and restricted. SGDK
—created by Stéphane Dallongeville and still actively maintained today— changed that com-
pletely: it’s free, open source, lets you program in C, and includes both the function library
you’llusethroughoutthismanualandthetoolsneededtoconvertgraphics,maps,music,and
3

=== PAGE 10 ===
sound effects into data the console can use.
2. The three protagonists of the hardware
TheMegaDrivesplitsitsworkamongthreemainpiecesofsilicon,eachwithaclearlydefined
job. Thatdivisionexplainsmuchofthedesigndecisionsyou’llencounterthroughouttherest
of the manual.
The main processor: Motorola 68000. This is the console’s brain, a 16/32-bit micropro-
cessor running at approximately 7.67 MHz on NTSC consoles (Japan/America) and 7.6 MHz
on PAL (Europe). All the C code you write with SGDK ends up compiled into instructions for
this processor. The 68000 has no floating-point unit (FPU): there’s no native, hardware-level
waytoworkwithdecimalnumbers,whichiswhySGDKoffersfixed-pointtypes(fix16,fix32)
instead of float or double — a topic revisited in detail later in this same foundational block.
The sound coprocessor: Zilog Z80. The Z80 is a second processor, simpler than the
68000, dedicated almost entirely to handling sound: it controls the FM synthesizer and the
programmablesoundgenerator(bothdescribedbelow). It’salsothesameprocessorusedby
theMasterSystem,whichletstheMegaDriverungamesfromthatearlierconsoleinaspecial
compatibility mode. For the 68000 to talk to the sound chips, it first has to “ask permission”
from the Z80 by temporarily handing it control of the data bus; that bus-handoff mechanism
is why, in SGDK, playing music and sound effects goes through specific functions (covered
in the part of this manual dedicated to sound) instead of being written directly as if it were
ordinary memory.
The video processor: VDP (Video Display Processor). The VDP draws everything that
appears on screen: backgrounds, sprites, any graphic visible on the television. It has its
own video memory, separate from main RAM, and is programmed through a set of control
registers. GivenhowcentralitistoeverythingvisualinaMegaDrivegame,thenextchapter
is devoted entirely to explaining it in depth.
3. The sound chips
Within the audio subsystem, controlled by the Z80, two sound chips coexist with very differ-
ent characteristics, and their combination is one of the console’s most recognizable sonic
trademarks:
• Yamaha YM2612: a 6-channel stereo FM (frequency modulation) synthesizer. It’s re-
sponsible for the more “metallic” and orchestral sound characteristic of Mega Drive
music, and it can also play back digitized audio samples (PCM), sacrificing one of its six
channels to do so.
• PSG (Programmable Sound Generator, an SN76489 or equivalent): a simpler, 4-
channel sound generator (three tone channels and one noise channel), inherited from
the previous generation of Sega hardware. It’s typically used for sound effects and to
reinforce the YM2612’s music with additional lines.
The part of this manual dedicated to sound explains in detail how SGDK exposes both chips
through its XGM and XGM2 drivers, as well as the workflow for creating and playing music
and sound effects.
4. Memory: a map of scarce resources
Oneofthemostimportanthabitsyou’lldevelopthroughoutthismanualisthinkingofmemory
asafiniteresourcethathastobeactivelymanaged,notsomethingthat’ssimply“there.” The
4

=== PAGE 11 ===
MegaDrivesplitsitsmemoryintoseveralindependentblocks,eachwithitsownpurposeand
fixed size:
Memory Size Use
Main RAM 64 KB Variables, data stacks, and
structures for the C program
VRAM (video memory) 64 KB Graphic tiles, plane name
tables, sprite table
CRAM (palette memory) 128 bytes 4 palettes of 16 colors each
VSRAM (vertical scroll 80 bytes Per-column vertical scroll
memory) offset values
Z80 RAM 8 KB Internal working memory for
the sound subsystem
Cartridge ROM Variable (up to several MB) The compiled program and
all its assets (graphics, maps,
music)
The first four rows of this table are internal console memory: they exist in a fixed amount
regardless of how large the inserted cartridge is, and they run out easily if not managed
carefully. Thelastrow,ROM,isthecartridge’sownmemory: that’swherethecompiledcode
lives,alongwithallthegame’sassets(images,maps,music,soundeffects)convertedintothe
format the console can read. ROM is much larger than RAM, but it has a different limitation:
everything in ROM is read-only during execution, so any data the game needs to modify at
runtime first has to be copied into one of the working memories (RAM, VRAM, CRAM).
Thisscarcityofinternalmemory—64KBofmainRAMis,togiveapointofreference,several
thousandtimeslessthanthememoryofamodernphone—isbehindmuchoftheprogramming
practices you’ll see throughout the manual: choosing the smallest data type that will do for
each variable, reusing graphic tiles instead of duplicating them, manually keeping track of
which portion of VRAM is occupied at any given time, and preferring constant data in ROM
over unnecessary copies in RAM.
Review exercises
1. Why doesn’t SGDK allow you to declare a float-type variable to represent, for example,
a character’s position with decimals?
2. Explain, in your own words, why playing sound on the Mega Drive isn’t as straightfor-
ward as writing data to a memory location: which processor is involved, and why?
3. What’s the difference between the console’s main RAM and the cartridge’s ROM, in
terms of what you can do with each during a game’s execution?
4. A 4 MB cartridge has, in that sense, much more capacity than the console’s 64 KB of
main RAM. Why doesn’t this eliminate the need to be careful with memory while pro-
gramming?
5

=== PAGE 12 ===
Chapter 2 — The VDP in Depth -
VRAM, CRAM, VSRAM, Planes,
Tiles, and Palettes
Thegraphicsvocabularythatwillbeused,withoutre-explainingit,throughouttherestofthe
manual
This chapter has no code: it is purely conceptual, and its sole purpose is to establish the
VDP (Video Display Processor) vocabulary that every following chapter will take for granted.
EverythingvisualinaMegaDrivegame(backgrounds,sprites,text,scrolling,transparencies)
passes through this chip, and it’s worth understanding how it organizes its work before you
start asking it to do things from C.
1. Tiles: the smallest unit of graphics
The VDP doesn’t draw loose images of arbitrary size: everything that appears on screen,
whether background or sprite, is built out of tiles, small 8×8 pixel square blocks. Each tile
takes up 32 bytes of video memory, because each of its 64 pixels is represented with 4 bits
(halfabyte): those4bitsaren’tacolordirectly,butratheranindexfrom0to15intoapalette
of16colors. Thisindexed-colorscheme—colorindexinthetile,actualcolorinthepalette—is
thereasonwhy,lateron,you’llseethatchangingthepaletteassignedtoagraphiccompletely
changes its appearance without touching a single bit of the tile itself.
VRAM has 64 KB in total, which would allow up to 2048 distinct tiles to be stored (64 KB
÷ 32 bytes per tile) if all of VRAM were used exclusively for that, which doesn’t happen in
practice: partofthatmemoryisreservedfortheplanes’nametablesandforthespritetable,
both explained below.
2. Palettes and CRAM: from index to actual color
The 128 bytes of CRAM (Color RAM) hold four palettes of 16 colors each (identified in SGDK
as PAL0 through PAL3), and each color takes up 2 bytes with a resolution of 9 bits: 3 bits for
theredcomponent,3forgreen,and3forblue,giving8intensitylevelsperchannelandupto
512possiblecolorsintotal. Atanygiveninstant,however,onlythe64colorscontainedinthe
four active palettes can be on screen (4 palettes × 16 colors), and of those 64, the first color
of each palette acts as the transparent color for sprites and for tiles with normal priority: in
practice, thisleaves60usablecolorsonscreenplusthebackgroundcolor(index0ofpalette
0), a total traditionally cited as 61 simultaneous colors.
Changing a palette’s values at runtime, without touching any tile, is a common technique
6

=== PAGE 13 ===
for achieving fade-ins and fade-outs or color-cycling animations; both are revisited in later
chapters.
3. The planes: A, B, and Window
The VDP organizes the screen background into independent planes, each formed by a grid
of tiles called a name table, stored in VRAM. There are three planes:
• Plane B (BG_B): by default, the one furthest back in the drawing order.
• Plane A (BG_A): by default, drawn in front of plane B.
• Window: aspecialplane,usuallyusedforuserinterfaceelements(scoredisplays,fixed
text)thatdon’tneedtoscrollalongwiththerestofthebackground;it’stypicallyoverlaid
on top of plane A.
Each position in a plane’s name table doesn’t store the graphic itself, but rather a compact
referencetoatilealreadyloadedintoVRAM,togetherwithahandfulofadditionalattributes:
which palette to use to paint it (one of the four, PAL0 through PAL3), whether it has high or
low priority relative to other graphical elements, and whether it should be displayed flipped
horizontally or vertically. This bundle of information —palette, priority, flip, tile index— is
exactly what the TILE_ATTR_FULL() macro assembles in SGDK, which you’ll use for the first
time in the chapter devoted to displaying a background on screen.
By default, the drawing order from back to front is: plane B, plane A, sprites. That order can
be altered by marking a particular plane or sprite with high priority, which brings it in front
of the rest of the elements that don’t have that flag; this tool is the basis for depth effects
such as making a character pass behind a foreground element.
Each plane also has a configurable size in tiles (for example, 64×32 or 128×64 tiles) that
usuallyexceedsthesizeofthevisiblescreen: thenon-visiblepartoftheplaneremainsstored
in VRAM, ready to be shown as the screen scrolls over it. That movement, scrolling, is con-
trolledindependentlyforeachplaneandisthemechanismbehindparallaxscrolling,covered
later on.
4. Sprites: graphics independent of the background plane
Unlike the tiles of a plane, a sprite is an independent graphical element that can be posi-
tioned at any pixel coordinate on the screen, without being tied to a plane’s grid. Sprites
havetheirown controltablein VRAM(theSprite AttributeTable, orSAT)andareassembled
by combining one or more tiles: a sprite can be as large as 32×32 pixels (4×4 tiles) as a sin-
gle hardware unit, although for larger characters it’s common to combine several hardware
sprites to form what looks like a single one from the game’s point of view.
The VDP hardware imposes strict limits on the number of sprites, which depend on the hor-
izontal resolution mode (see below): in H40 mode (320 pixels wide), up to 80 simultaneous
sprites are allowed on screen, with a maximum of 20 per horizontal line; in H32 mode (256
pixels),thelimitsdropto64spritestotaland16perline. Exceedingtheper-linelimitdoesn’t
produce an error, but rather a visible flicker of the excess sprites, a very characteristic (and
often unavoidable) effect of games from this console generation.
5. VSRAM and scroll modes
The 80 bytes of VSRAM (Vertical Scroll RAM) store the vertical scroll offset values for the
planes. The VDP supports different scroll modes, which determine the granularity at which
7

=== PAGE 14 ===
each plane can be scrolled: by whole plane (the entire plane moves as a unit), by pixel line
(eachhorizontallineofthescreencanscrollindependently,thebasisofmanyparallaxeffects),
or by 16-pixel column. This combination of modes is what allows, for example, a per-line
horizontal scroll that creates a sense of depth while the vertical scroll moves by whole plane.
The chapter devoted to scrolling and parallax scrolling returns to this with concrete code.
6. Resolution modes: H40 and H32
The VDP can operate in two horizontal resolution modes: H40, with 320 pixels of width (40
tiles),andH32,with256pixels(32tiles),largelyinheritedfromcompatibilitywiththeMaster
System. The standard vertical resolution is 224 visible lines in V28 mode (the most common,
available on both NTSC and PAL consoles), although PAL consoles also support a V30 mode
of 240 lines, not available on NTSC. The choice of horizontal mode isn’t purely cosmetic: as
mentioned above, it also changes the limits on the number of available sprites.
Review exercises
1. Explain what it means for a tile’s color to be “indexed,” and why that makes it possible
to completely change a graphic’s appearance without modifying its tiles.
2. What is the maximum number of colors that can exist across the VDP’s four active
palettes at any given instant? How many of those colors are actually visible on screen,
and why?
3. What’sthedifferencebetweenatileinabackgroundplaneandasprite,intermsofhow
they’re positioned on screen?
4. Why isn’t switching from H40 resolution mode to H32 a purely cosmetic decision?
8

=== PAGE 15 ===
Chapter 3 — Installing and
Configuring the SGDK 2.11
Environment
How to get your machine ready to build your first project, on Windows, Linux, and macOS
1. What SGDK Is
SGDK(SegaGenesisDevelopmentKit)isafree,open-sourcesetoftoolsandlibrariesthatlets
youprogramMegaDrive/GenesisgamesinC.Itconsistsofthreepieces: aCfunctionlibrary
(theoneusedthroughoutthismanual,includedvia#include <genesis.h>),asetofresource-
conversiontools(forimages,maps,music,andsound)knownasrescomp,andaversionofthe
GCC compiler adapted to generate code for the Motorola 68000 processor. The library and
thetools are MIT-licensed; the GCCcompiler itself, being a third-partyproject, is distributed
under the GPL3 license. The project is actively maintained by Stéphane Dallongeville, and
this manual is based on its latest stable release, SGDK 2.11 (April 2025).
2. Installing on Windows
Windows is the platform with the best direct support, because the project itself distributes
precompiled toolchain binaries (including GCC 13.2) ready to use.
1. Java: rescomp, the resource-conversion tool, needs Java to run. Install a recent version
ofaJavadistribution(OracleJDKorOpenJDK)andmakesureit’savailableonthesystem
PATH.
2. Download: grab the latest SGDK release from the official repository’s releases page
(github.com/Stephane-D/SGDK/releases) and unzip it into a folder whose path contains
no spaces, for example C:\sgdk.
3. Environmentvariable(optionalbutrecommended): createanenvironmentvariable
named GDK pointing to that folder. Several tools and editor extensions (like the one
covered in the next chapter) use it to automatically locate the toolchain.
4. Verification: open a terminal in that folder and run:
bin\make -f makelib.gen
If everything is installed correctly, the command finishes by generating the file
lib\libmd.a, SGDK’s already-compiled library. If that file appears, the environment is
ready.
9

=== PAGE 16 ===
3. Installing on Linux and macOS
Unlike Windows, SGDK does not distribute precompiled binaries for Linux or macOS, and as
of version 2.10 the project stopped maintaining its own Docker image, recommending
instead two alternative paths:
• MarsDev (github.com/andwn/marsdev): a cross-platform (Windows, Linux, macOS) de-
velopment environment that installs and keeps up to date both SGDK and the rest of
the required toolchain, including support for the 32X if you ever need it. It’s generally
the recommended option for anyone not on Windows: you download the project, set an
environment variable pointing to the desired installation folder, and run make sgdk to
complete the installation.
• Third-partyDockerimages: thecommunitymaintainsupdated,testedDockerimages,
the most recommended one currently being Doragasu’s (gitlab.com/doragasu/docker-
sgdk), designed specifically to replace the discontinued official image. This alternative
is useful if you already work with containers in your usual workflow, or if you’d rather
not install the toolchain directly on your operating system.
In either case, Java remains a requirement for rescomp, just as on Windows.
A detail that’s changed since older tutorials |
It’s common to find, in tutorials and documentation from a few | years back, references to
an official Docker image maintained by | the SGDK project itself. That image is no longer
maintained: if | you’re following a guide that mentions it, replace it with MarsDev | or with
the Doragasu image mentioned above. |
4. Verifying the Installation
OnWindows,Linux,ormacOS,theenvironmentisreadyoncetheGCCcompilerforthe68000
responds (natively, via MarsDev, or inside a Docker container), Java is available for rescomp,
and SGDK’s libmd.a library finishes compiling without errors. The next chapter installs the
editor and extension used throughout the rest of the manual to create projects, build them,
and test the result in an emulator, without having to type out every build command by hand.
Review exercises
1. What is Java needed for in an SGDK installation, given that the programming language
is C?
2. WhatconcretedifferenceistherebetweeninstallingSGDKonWindowsversusonLinux
or macOS, in terms of the availability of precompiled binaries?
3. If you’re following a tutorial that mentions an official SGDK Docker image, what should
you do, and why?
10

=== PAGE 17 ===
Chapter 4 — Editor, Extension,
and Emulators
The everyday working tools: a code editor, assisted compilation, and how to test the result
With the SGDK toolchain installed (previous chapter), two more things need to be sorted out
beforewritingthefirstprogram: acomfortableeditorforworkingwiththecodeandresource
files, and a way to run the result without having to pull a real console out of the closet every
time you compile.
1. Visual Studio Code and the Genesis Code extension
ThismanualusesVisualStudioCodeasthereferenceeditor,togetherwiththeGenesisCode
extension, available on the VS Code extension marketplace. The extension doesn’t replace
SGDK: it automates tasks that would otherwise have to be done by hand from a terminal
(creating the structure of a new project, compiling, running it on the configured emulator)
andaddsconvenienceslikeautocompletionfor.resresourcefilesandabuilt-inimageviewer.
Toconfigureit,youneedtotellitwherethetoolchainisinstalled. FromFile→Preferences→
Settings (or Ctrl+,), searching for the extension’s section, you can choose between several
toolchain types depending on which one was installed in the previous chapter:
• Native SGDK, pointing to the GDK environment variable.
• MarsDev,pointingtotheenvironmentvariableunderwhichitwasinstalled(forexample
GENDEV or MARS_INSTALL_DIR, depending on the chosen installation).
• Docker,specifyingtheimagetouse(forexample,theDoragasuimagementionedinthe
previous chapter).
Thesamesettingssectionalsoletsyoudefinewhichemulatortousefortestingthecompiled
game(seebelow),andyoucanenableauxiliarybuttonsintheeditor’sstatusbartobuild,run,
and clean the project with a single click.
2. Emulators
Anemulatorletsyoutesttheresultofyourcodeinseconds,withoutgoingthroughaphysical
cartridge or a real console. None of them reproduces the original hardware one hundred
percent, so it’s worth knowing more than one and being aware of their differences:
• Gens (or its modified variant, Gens KMod, Windows only): includestoolsdesigned
specifically for development, such as a VDP memory viewer, a sprite viewer, and 68000
debugging functions. It’s a convenient option for day-to-day work if you’re on Windows.
11

=== PAGE 18 ===
• BlastEm: generally considered the emulator that most faithfully reproduces the behav-
ior of the real hardware, with its own VDP memory viewer and 68000 debugging. It’s
cross-platform.
• Kega Fusion: abroadlycompatibleemulator,usefulasanadditionalreferenceforspot-
tingbehaviorsthatdependonthequirksofoneparticularemulatorandaren’treplicated
in another.
None of the three completely replaces the others: it’s common practice, especially when de-
buggingstrangebehavior,totestthesamecodeonmorethanoneemulatorbeforeassuming
the problem lies in the game itself rather than in the particularities of one specific emulator.
3. Testing on real hardware
The project compiled with SGDK generates, inside the project folder (usually in an out sub-
folder),arom.binfile. ThatfilecanbeloadedontoanoriginalMegaDriveorGenesisconsole
usingaflashcart: acartridgewithamemorycard(SDorsimilar)thatletsyourunhomebrew
ROMs without having to burn a new physical cartridge every time. The device most widely
used in the community is the EverDrive. Testing your own code on original hardware isn’t a
mandatory step for following this manual, but it’s the only way to confirm with certainty that
something works exactly the same as on a real console, and not only on the emulator used
during development.
Review exercises
1. WhatdoestheGenesisCodeextensionautomatethatyouwouldotherwisehavetodoby
hand from a terminal?
2. Whycanitbeusefultotestthesamecodeonmorethanoneemulator,insteadofalways
relying on just one?
3. What is a flash cart, and what is it used for in the context of developing a Mega Drive
game?
12

=== PAGE 19 ===
Chapter 5 — First Program -
SGDK Project Structure and
Compilation
From an empty folder to a “Hello World” running in the emulator
With the environment installed and the editor configured, this chapter walks through the
completepathtoseeingsomethingonscreen: creatinganewproject, understandingwhatit
contains, writing the first program, and compiling it.
1. Creating a new project
From Visual Studio Code, with the Genesis Code extension installed, the command palette
(Ctrl+Shift+P) command Genesis Code: Create Project creates the minimal structure of
an SGDK project in the specified folder. That structure consists of three main folders:
• src/: the project’s C source code. This is where the main file, main.c, lives.
• inc/: the project’s own header files (.h), distinct from the ones SGDK generates auto-
maticallyfromresources(atopicrevisitedinthepartofthismanualdedicatedtoproject
organization).
• res/: theresourcefiles—images,maps,sounds,music—alongwiththeresources.res
file that tells SGDK how to convert them.
2. The minimal skeleton of a program
Every SGDK program starts from a minimal structure like this:
#include <genesis.h>
int main()
{
while (1)
{
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return (0);
}
#include <genesis.h> brings in the entire SGDK library: it’s the only inclusion needed to
13

=== PAGE 20 ===
access the functions used throughout this manual (later on, once the project has its own
resources,#include <resources.h>isaddedaswell—thefileSGDKgeneratesautomatically
at compile time).
The body of main() is an infinite loop (while (1)) that never ends as long as the console
is powered on: unlike a desktop program, a game doesn’t “finish” execution in the tradi-
tional sense — instead, it keeps running indefinitely, drawing frame after frame. Inside that
loop,SYS_doVBlankProcess()tellsSGDKtosynchronizependingwork(updatingsprites, pro-
cessing the queued DMA, waiting for the next video frame) with the VDP’s vertical blanking
interval, the brief span between one drawn frame and the next during which it’s safe to mod-
ify certain graphical data. Practically every main loop you’ll write from here on contains, at
minimum, a call to this function on every pass.
In older code or documentation it’s common to find VDP_waitVSync() fulfilling a
similar role. That function was replaced by SYS_doVBlankProcess() as of SGDK
1.60;ifyoucomeacrossVDP_waitVSync()inanoldtutorial,it’stheequivalentfrom
an earlier version of the library.
3. A first visible result: text on screen
To confirm that the project compiles and runs, it’s enough to draw a string of text on one of
the background planes, using VDP_drawText():
#include <genesis.h>
int main()
{
VDP_drawText("Hola Mundo", 10, 12);
while (1)
{
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return (0);
}
VDP_drawText() takes three parameters: the text string to display, and the horizontal and
vertical position in tiles (not pixels) where it should appear, relative to the default text font
that comes with SGDK. There’s no need to declare any resource in resources.res for this
particular example: the default text font is already included in the library.
4. Compiling and running
WiththeGenesisCode: Compile&Runcommand(ortheequivalentbuttoninthestatusbar,
ifenabledintheextension’ssettings)theprojectiscompiledand,ifanemulatorisconfigured,
it’s run automatically to show the result. Manually, without going through the extension,
compilation is triggered with make from the project folder, using the Makefile that comes
with the template.
Theresultofasuccessfulcompilationisarom.binfileinsideanout/subfolderoftheproject:
that binary file is, ultimately, the complete program, ready to run both in an emulator and,
via a flash cart, on real hardware.
14

=== PAGE 21 ===
Review exercises
1. Why is the body of main() in an SGDK program an infinite loop, unlike many desktop or
traditional console programs?
2. What does SYS_doVBlankProcess() do, and why does practically every main loop in this
manual call it at least once per pass?
3. Are the position parameters of VDP_drawText() expressed in pixels or in tiles?
4. Wheredoestherom.binfileendupaftercompiling,andwhatcanbedonewithitbesides
running it in an emulator?
15

=== PAGE 22 ===
Chapter 6 — C Applied to Retro
Development - Data Types,
Limited Memory, and Pointers
When to use u8, u16, int, and the fixed-point types fix16/fix32; how to think about 64 KB of
memory; and what changes about pointers in this environment
This chapter assumes basic knowledge of C (variable declaration, functions, introductory-
level pointers) and focuses on the part that is not the same as programming for a modern
computer: which data types are worth choosing and why, how to think about a memory of
barely 64 KB, and what nuances pointers have when much of the data you work with lives in
the cartridge’s read-only ROM.
1. Integer types: u8, s8, u16, s16, and int
In addition to C’s standard types, SGDK defines a set of aliases with names that make their
size and sign explicit: u8/s8 (8 bits), u16/s16 (16 bits), and, for 32 bits, simply int (signed)
without needing a special alias. The initial letter indicates whether the type is signed (s,
signed) or not (u, unsigned); the number indicates how many bits it occupies in memory.
• u8: 8 bits (1 byte), unsigned. Since 8 bits allow for 2⁸ = 256 distinct combinations, a u8
represents integers from 0 to 255.
• s8: the same 8 bits, the same 256 combinations, the same size in memory, but split
between negative and positive values: from -128 to 127.
• u16: 16 bits (2 bytes), unsigned, with 2¹⁶ = 65,536 possible combinations: from 0 to
65,535. It’snocoincidencethatthisfigurematchesthesizeinbytesofboththeconsole’s
main RAM and its VRAM.
• s16: the same 16 bits, signed, from -32,768 to 32,767.
• int: 32 bits, signed, from -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647. This range is so large that,
inpractice,it’salmostneveroverflowedbyaccidentwithinthereasonabledurationofa
play session.
When any of these types exceeds its upper limit (or lower limit, for signed types), no error
occurs: thevalueoverflowsandkeepscountingfromtheotherendofitsrange. Thisbehavior
ispredictable,andonceunderstoodinadvance,itcanbeusedtoyouradvantage(forexample,
for cyclic counters); without understanding it, it’s a frequent source of hard-to-track bugs.
Apracticaldetailworthkeepinginmindwhendisplayingthesevaluesastext(withsprintf()
andthenVDP_drawText()orVDP_drawTextBG(),asisdoneinseveralchaptersofthismanual):
the negative sign takes up a character of its own within the destination string. A string
declared with just enough size for a u8 (char texto[3], for “255”) falls short as soon as
that same variable becomes an s8 and takes on a negative value like “-128” (4 characters);
16

=== PAGE 23 ===
the result, if the string and the sprintf() format aren’t enlarged accordingly, gets visibly
corrupted. The same precaution — one extra character for the sign — applies to any signed
type displayed on screen.
When to use each type
Thegeneralruleistoalwaysusethesmallesttypethatsufficesfortheintendedpurpose: each
int takes up 4 bytes out of a total memory of 64 KB, each u16/s16 takes up 2, and each u8/s8
just 1. For values with a naturally bounded range — number of lives, number of continues,
the current level, or a frame counter for invincibility after taking damage (255 frames equal
more than four seconds at 60 frames per second, more than enough in most cases) — a u8 is
usuallymorethansufficient;infact,thisisacommonpatternincommercialgamesfromthat
era: the rupee counter in The Legend of Zelda, for example, caps at exactly 255.
2. Numbers with decimals: there is no float
As explained in the architecture chapter, the Motorola 68000 processor has no floating-point
unit. Using float or double in SGDK is possible at the language level, but every operation
with those types ends up resolved in software, at a very high performance cost for hardware
of this era; in practice, they’re virtually never used. Instead, SGDK offers fixed-point types:
numbersthatreserveafixednumberofbitsfortheintegerpartandanotherfixednumberfor
the decimal part, and that are represented internally as ordinary integers (and are therefore
just as fast to operate on as any int).
• fix16: 16 bits total, split into 10 bits for the integer part and 6 for the decimal part. It’s
declared and initialized with the FIX16() macro:
fix16 posicion = FIX16(0);
posicion += FIX16(1); // add 1 whole integer
With 6 decimal bits, the smallest representable increment is 1/64 ≈ 0.0156, and with
only10integerbits,afix16overflowsfarsoonerthananordinarys16(alittlepast500).
That combination — small integer range, but very fine decimal steps — makes it ideal
for slow, bounded movement, such as a background layer in a parallax scroll.
• fix32: 32 bits total, with 22 bits for the integer part and 10 for the decimal part, ini-
tialized with FIX32(). Its integer range is enormous compared to fix16, at the cost of
takinguptwicethememory. It’stherecommendedtypeforrepresentingthepositionof
acharacteroranenemyonamapseveralthousandpixelswide,whereafix16’sinteger
range would fall short.
Toconvertafixed-pointvaluetoaregularinteger(forexample,todisplayitwithsprintf(),or
touseitasapixelcoordinateinafunctionthatexpectsaninteger),SGDKprovidesdedicated
conversion functions: F16_toInt() for fix16 and F32_toInt() for fix32.
Code or tutorials written before April 2025 (SGDK 2.10) use the names
fix16ToInt() and fix32ToInt() instead of F16_toInt() and F32_toInt(). Start-
ing with that version, the entire fixed-point math library switched to using the
F16_/F32_/FF16_/FF32_ prefix consistently; the functions’ behavior didn’t change,
only the name.
Adding a value smaller than 1 with an ordinary integer type doesn’t make sense (entero +=
0.1 simply doesn’t compile to represent the intended meaning), but it does with fixed point:
it’s the standard technique for movement slower than one whole pixel per frame. That said,
it’s worth keeping the screen resolution in mind when choosing an increment: in H40 mode,
an element can only visually move by one whole pixel at a time, so a very small fractional
17

=== PAGE 24 ===
increment takes several frames to translate into visible movement, which can feel choppy if
the chosen step is too small for the desired speed.
3. Thinking in 64 KB: memory as an active resource
The console’s main RAM has 64 KB in total, a fixed limit regardless of the cartridge’s size.
That total has to be enough for all of the program’s global variables, the function call stack,
anydynamicdatastructures,andtheinternalworkthattheSGDKlibraryitselfneedsinorder
to function. This leads to a few habits that may not be necessary when programming for a
modern computer:
• Prefer constant data in ROM over copies in RAM. An array declared as const (for
example,atableoffixedvalues,orthedataofaresourcealreadyconvertedbyrescomp)
is stored in the cartridge’s ROM and read directly from there, without taking up any of
the 64 KB of RAM. Reserving that memory for what actually needs to be able to change
at runtime is one of the most important design decisions in this whole manual.
• Bewaryofdynamicmemoryallocation. SGDKprovidesMEM_alloc()andMEM_free()
(and,forcompatibility,malloc()/free()redirecttothesamefunctions)toallocatemem-
ory at runtime, but careless use — allocating and freeing blocks of very different sizes
throughout an entire playthrough — can quickly fragment such a small memory space,
leaving free blocks too small and scattered to satisfy a new allocation, even when the
total amount of free space would be sufficient. Declaring fixed-size arrays whose size
is known in advance (for example, an array for up to 16 active enemies instead of a
variable-sized list) is usually preferable whenever the maximum limit can be estimated
with some margin.
• Choosethesmallesttypethatsuffices,asalreadycoveredinsection1: thedifference
between a 50-element array declared as int (200 bytes) and the same array as u8 (50
bytes) may seem small in the abstract, but it becomes significant once it’s repeated
across dozens of structures throughout a complete game.
4. Pointers in an environment with read-only memory
Pointers in SGDK work exactly the same as in any other C program: a variable that stores a
memory address instead of a direct value. What’s particular about this environment is that a
gooddealofthedataapointercanpointto—resourcesgeneratedbyrescomp(images,maps,
sound tables), any array declared const — lives in the cartridge’s ROM, which is read-only
at runtime. A pointer can perfectly well read that data, but any attempt to write through it
to a ROM address has no useful effect (in the best case) or corrupts the program’s behavior
unpredictably (in the worst case). For this reason, it’s good practice to declare as const any
pointerintendedpurelyforreadingaresource’sdata,lettingthecompileritselfflagitifsome
part of the code mistakenly tries to write to that memory.
For cartridges exceeding 4 MB of ROM, SGDK also includes a bank switching mechanism
thatallowsaddressingmorememorythanthe68000canaccessdirectlyatanygiveninstant;
this topic is beyond the scope of this introductory chapter and is revisited, along with the
FAR()/FAR_SAFE() functions that manage it, in the part of this manual dedicated to optimiza-
tion.
Review exercises
1. Whycanans8representthesame256valuesasau8,butwithadifferentnumericrange?
18

=== PAGE 25 ===
2. A teammate changes a variable from u16 to s16 without adjusting the size of the text
string used to display it with sprintf(). What problem can arise, and why?
3. Why doesn’t SGDK offer a practically usable float type, and what does it use instead to
represent numbers with decimals?
4. Explain in your own words why fix32 is more appropriate than fix16 for the position of
a character on a map several thousand pixels wide.
5. Whyisitagoodideatodeclareasconstapointerthat’sonlyusedtoreadthedataofan
image generated by rescomp?
19

=== PAGE 26 ===
Chapter 7 — How to Display
Backgrounds on the Mega Drive
TheBG_AandBG_Bplanes,theSGDKresourcepipeline,andtheVDP_drawImageExfunction
Every Mega Drive game needs, at the very least, to put an image on screen. This chapter
covers that first step in the most direct way possible: how to take a PNG image made on a
computerandturnitintovisibledataononeofthetwobackgroundplanesofferedbytheVDP.
Thejourneypassesthroughfourstagesthatwillreappear,withvariations,inpracticallyevery
graphic displayed on screen from here on: declaring the resource so the compiler includes
it in the ROM, reserving a spot for it in VRAM, assigning it a color palette, and finally asking
the VDP to draw it on a plane.
Chapter 2 developed the hardware behind this operation in depth: the VDP, the VRAM, the
BG_A/BG_B/Window planes, tiles, and the PAL0-PAL3 palettes. That vocabulary is assumed
to be familiar here; this chapter’s focus is on the code: which function to use, with which
parameters, and why.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• AworkingSGDK2.11environmentinstalled,capableofcompilingandrunningaproject
in an emulator, as covered in chapters 3 and 4.
• BasicnotionsofC:declaringvariables,types,functions,andstructures(revisitedinmore
detail in chapter 6).
• A general understanding of what VRAM, a tile, and a color palette are on the Mega
Drive’s VDP (chapter 2).
• An SGDK project with a minimal main.c, following the structure shown in chapter 5.
Thecentralfunctionsinthischapter(PAL_setPalette(),VDP_drawImageEx(),theTILE_ATTR_FULL()
macro, the TILE_USERINDEX constant, and the syntax of the IMAGE resource in a .res file)
keep,inSGDK2.11,exactlythesamename,thesamesignature,andthesamebehaviorasin
fairly old versions of the kit. All the code in this chapter can be written and compiled exactly
as it appears here, with no further adaptation. If you come across older code or forum posts,
onenamingdetailmaycatchyoureye: beforeSGDK1.50, theplaneswerecalledPLAN_Aand
PLAN_B instead of BG_A and BG_B — the same concept under a different name.
1. The resource pipeline: from a PNG file to the ROM
An image created on a computer is not automatically available inside a Mega Drive program.
Before it can be drawn, SGDK needs to be told to include it in the ROM (the final binary file
20

=== PAGE 27 ===
that runs on the console or in an emulator) and under what name the C code will be able to
refer to it. That step is handled with a resource file.
Inside the project’s res folder, a file called resources.res is created. Each line in this file
describesadistinctresourcetobeincludedintheROM:laterontherewillbelinesforsound
effects, music, and sprites, but for now a single image is enough:
IMAGE bg1 "background1.png" BEST ALL
This line declares an image-type resource called bg1, taken from the file background1.png,
with BEST compression and ALL map optimization. Each field plays a specific role, and SGDK
is strict about uppercase, lowercase, and spacing:
• IMAGE(uppercase)indicatestheresourcetype: inthiscase, afullimage(tilesetplustile
map plus palette), meant for a simple static background.
• bg1 is the name the C code will use to refer to this resource. It can be called whatever
you like, as long as it’s a single word with no spaces and reasonably short.
• "background1.png" is the path to the image file in quotes, relative to the res folder.
• BEST (uppercase) indicates the compression mode. The most common alternatives are
NONE(uncompressed),FAST(analgorithmthat’squickertodecompressbutlesscompact),
and BEST (which produces the smallest file, though it takes a bit longer to decompress
atruntime). Forabackgroundimageloadedonlyonce,BESTisusuallythemostsensible
choice.
• ALL, at the end, is the tile map optimization: it tells the compiler to reuse identical tiles
(includingtilesflippedhorizontallyorvertically)insteadofrepeatingthem,savingspace
in the ROM and, later, in VRAM.
The name bg1 isn’t available for autocomplete or for the main.c compiler until the
project is saved and compiled at least once: only then does SGDK generate the
corresponding resources.h file, from which the rest of the code can recognize and
include that resource. If you type bg1 in main.c immediately after creating the line
in resources.res, it’s normal for the editor not to recognize it yet.
The IMAGE resource type bundles the tileset, the tile map, and the palette of a full image into
a single declaration, which is convenient for a static background like the one in this chapter.
For backgrounds larger than one screen, for levels with scrolling, or for sharing the same
set of tiles across several images, SGDK lets you declare the TILESET, MAP (or TILEMAP), and
PALETTEresourcesseparately,givingmorecontroloverhowthey’reorganizedintheROMand
in VRAM. This chapter doesn’t need that yet; the topic comes back in the chapter devoted to
scroll and parallax scrolling, later in this same part of the manual.
With the resource declared and the project compiled at least once, main.c can now include
thefilegeneratedbySGDKandstartsettingthestagefordrawingtheimage. Sincenotextis
goingtobeshownyet,it’sworthremovinganysamplecalltoVDP_drawText()thattheproject
template might include:
#include <genesis.h>
#include <resources.h>
int main()
{
while(1)
{
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return (0);
}
21

=== PAGE 28 ===
The file included from main.c is resources.h (with a .h extension), generated auto-
matically when compiling from resources.res. The .res file is the source you edit
byhand;the.hfileistheCinterfacethatresultsfromprocessingit,andit’stheone
the rest of the program consumes. There’s no need to include the .res file directly,
and in fact it isn’t possible.
2. Reserving a spot in VRAM: TILE_USERINDEX
The VDP’s VRAM isn’t free space from start to finish: its first positions are reserved for
the system and, if the project uses SGDK’s default text font, also for that font’s tiles. Before
uploadingthetilesofyourownimage,youneedtostartfromapositionthatdoesn’toverwrite
any of that. SGDK exposes exactly that position through a constant:
u16 ind = TILE_USERINDEX;
TILE_USERINDEXisthefirstVRAMtileindexleftfreefortheprogrammeraftersubtractingthe
tiles reserved by the system. The variable ind, declared as u16 (an unsigned 16-bit integer,
more than enough since the VDP’s VRAM has 2048 tile positions in total), keeps track of the
VRAM position at which each new graphic is uploaded as the program needs it. A variable
that advances as chunks of VRAM are reserved — the same idea reappears, with much more
detailandwiththecomplicationsitcanbring,inthechapteronsavingVRAMthroughmanual
sprite loading, in the part of this manual devoted to optimization.
3. Assigning a palette: PAL_setPalette
The Mega Drive can display up to 64 colors on screen, split across four palettes of 16 colors
each (PAL0 through PAL3). Before drawing an image, the VDP needs to be told which colors
to paint it with, and those colors have to come from one of those four palettes. The function
that does this is PAL_setPalette():
void PAL_setPalette(u16 numPal, const u16 *pal, TransferMethod tm);
The three parameters are: numPal, the palette number this color information should be as-
signedto(PAL0,PAL1,PAL2,orPAL3);pal,apointertothecolordataitself;andtm,thetransfer
method. The full call, in this case, is:
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, bg1.palette->data, DMA);
bg1.palette->data takes the color information directly from the Image structure generated
frombackground1.png: there’snoneedtowritethecolorsbyhand,sincethey’realreadypack-
aged together with the image from the moment the resource was declared in resources.res.
The last parameter, DMA, indicates that the transfer of that color data is done via direct mem-
ory access (Direct Memory Access), a copying mechanism that doesn’t use up CPU time; the
alternativeisCPU,whichcopiesthedatausingtheprocessor. Foraone-offoperationlikethis,
either one works fine; DMA is, generally speaking, the recommended option since it costs
less CPU time.
Ifoneofthebackgroundorforegroundimagesisn’tassignedtoPAL0, it’scommon
for it to lose its first color (the color at index 0 of the palette, which on the Mega
Drive’s VDP is always the background/transparency color). For that reason, as a
general rule, it’s a good idea to reserve PAL0 for the farthest-back background
graphic — usually the background itself on BG_B — and use PAL1, PAL2, or PAL3
for the rest.
22

=== PAGE 29 ===
4. Drawing the image: VDP_drawImageEx and TILE_ATTR_FULL
With the resource declared, the VRAM space reserved, and the palette assigned, the last
step is to ask the VDP to actually draw the image on one of the two background planes. The
function for this is VDP_drawImageEx():
bool VDP_drawImageEx(VDPPlane plane, const Image *image, u16 basetile,
u16 x, u16 y, bool loadpal, bool dma);
Theparameters, inorder,are: plane,thebackgroundplanetodrawon(BG_AorBG_B;there’s
alsoWINDOW,whichisn’tusedinthischapter);image,apointertotheImagestructuregenerated
fromtheresource;basetile,theVRAMpositionfromwhichthisimage’stileswillbewritten;
xandy,thepositiononscreen; loadpal,whetherthepaletteshouldalsobeloadedaspartof
this same call; and dma, whether the tile transfer should be done via DMA.
The basetile parameter isn’t passed as a plain number, but through a macro that packs
severalpiecesofinformationintoasinglevalue: TILE_ATTR_FULL(pal, prio, flipV, flipH,
index).
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, &bg1, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind), 0, 0,
↪ FALSE, TRUE);
Each tile in the Mega Drive’s VRAM doesn’t just store its pixel pattern: it also carries, in
the plane’s name table, attribute bits that indicate which palette to paint it with, whether
it has high or low priority, and whether it should be shown flipped vertically or horizontally.
TILE_ATTR_FULL() packs those attributes into a single value:
• pal — which of the four palettes (PAL0 through PAL3) to use for this tile.
• prio (priority) — whether this plane is drawn in front of (TRUE) or behind (FALSE, the
default value) the other graphic elements it shares the screen with.
• flipV — whether the tile is shown flipped vertically.
• flipH — whether the tile is shown flipped horizontally.
• index—theVRAMposition(thesamevaluetrackedintheindvariable)fromwhichthis
image’s tiles start.
Withallthisinplace,saving,compiling,andrunningtheprojectalreadyshowsthefirstback-
ground on screen.
Firstresultintheemulator: thenighttimecafescenewiththeneonsign,nowdrawnonBG_B.
5. Experimenting with the parameters
Before adding a second plane, it’s worth pausing to modify, one at a time, the parameters
just used. This isn’t an idle exercise: clearly understanding what each one does saves a lot
of debugging time later on, when these same parameters show up combined with scrolling,
sprites, and several layers at once.
5.1 Switching palettes without having loaded one
If you change the pal in TILE_ATTR_FULL() from PAL0 to PAL1 without having first called
PAL_setPalette(PAL1, ...), the result is not subtle: the image comes out drawn almost
entirely in red.
Thesamebackground,specifyingPAL1withouthavinginitializedit: theVDPdrawsitjustthe
same, but with the default color of an empty palette.
23

=== PAGE 30 ===
Figure 1: The background1.png background drawn on the BG_B plane
Figure2: ThebackgrounddrawnwithPAL1withouthavingloadedcolordataintothatpalette
24

=== PAGE 31 ===
The red you see isn’t an effect or an error in the image data: it’s simply the default content
of a palette that was never loaded with color information. The VDP draws the tiles just the
same, with the correct geometry, but looks up colors in an empty palette. Switching back to
PAL0, the palette that was actually initialized with PAL_setPalette(), the background looks
normal again.
5.2 Flipping tiles: flipV and flipH
ChangingflipVtoTRUEmakeseverytileontheplaneshowupflippedvertically: theneonsign
and the building’s facade appear upside down. The result with flipH is analogous, flipping
horizontally.
In this specific context — a static background — flipping the whole plane doesn’t have much
practical use, but the same mechanism is the basis for a significant memory saving: if a tile
and its flipped version are visually identical, there’s no need to store both in VRAM or in the
ROM. It’s enough to keep just one and, when drawing it, indicate that you want it shown
flipped. In practice there’s no need to manage this by hand tile by tile: when converting
graphics with the right tools, SGDK automatically recognizes which tiles are flips of others
andavoidsduplicatingtheminVRAM,somethingthat’srevisitedinmoredetailinthechapter
devoted to creating graphics.
Although flipping an entire plane rarely serves a purpose for a static background,
thesameparameterisveryusefulforsprites: it’sthestandardmechanismformak-
ingacharacterfaceleftorrightwithoutneedingdoublethegraphicsordoublethe
VRAMspace,byflippingthesamespritehorizontallydependingonwhichdirection
it’s moving.
5.3 Priority: what gets drawn in front of what
By default, the Mega Drive’s drawing order runs from the background plane (BG_B) at the
back, the foreground plane (BG_A) in the middle, and the sprites in front of everything. The
prio parameter lets you alter that order for a particular plane. Changing BG_B’s priority to
TRUE, for example, makes that plane get drawn in front of BG_A.
WithBG_Bsettohighpriority,thecheckeredfloorofthebackgroundcoversalmosttheentire
car and lamppost in the foreground, which are left barely peeking through.
Inthisparticularexampletheresultisn’tespeciallyuseful(theforegroundendsuppractically
hidden), but the tool itself is very useful in other situations. Streets of Rage is a frequently
citedcase: inseveralscenes,thecharacterspritesneedtoappearbehindcertainforeground
elements (a streetlamp or a sign, for example), even though sprites are drawn in front of
everything by default. The solution is the same tool just shown: give the foreground (BG_A)
high priority and leave both the background and the sprites at normal priority, so the final
order ends up being background, then sprites, and finally the foreground with high priority.
5.4 Coordinates: x and y are measured in tiles, not pixels
The x and y parameters of VDP_drawImageEx() aren’t pixel coordinates but tile coordinates.
Since each Mega Drive tile measures 8×8 pixels, a value of x = 10 shifts the image 80 pixels
to the right (10 tiles × 8 pixels), not 10 pixels.
It’sa common mistake, especially when startingout, topass a value of x or y think-
ing in pixels and end up with a shift eight times larger than expected. It’s worth
keeping this in mind especially later on, when calculating positions from other el-
ements’ coordinates (a sprite’s position in pixels, for instance) which, if combined
without converting, can produce results very different from what was intended.
25

=== PAGE 32 ===
Figure 3: BG_B with high priority covering the foreground
Thesesamepositionparameters,combinedwithanoffsetthatchangesframebyframeinstead
of staying fixed, are the basis of the scrolling and parallax scrolling covered later in this part
of the manual.
6. Adding a second plane: the foreground (BG_A)
With one plane working, adding the second one is, for the most part, a matter of repeating
the same recipe: declare the resource, assign a palette, and draw the image — this time on
BG_A. First, the new line is added to resources.res:
IMAGE bg1 "background1.png" BEST ALL
IMAGE fg1 "foreground1.png" BEST ALL
After saving and compiling once so the new name fg1 becomes available, the full code looks
like this:
u16 ind = TILE_USERINDEX;
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, bg1.palette->data, DMA);
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, &bg1, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind), 0, 0,
↪ FALSE, TRUE);
ind += bg1.tileset->numTile;
PAL_setPalette(PAL1, fg1.palette->data, DMA);
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_A, &fg1, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL1, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind), 0, 0,
↪ FALSE, TRUE);
Two details are not optional. The first is the line ind += bg1.tileset->numTile;, which adds
26

=== PAGE 33 ===
to ind the number of tiles taken up by the first background before uploading the second one.
ThesecondisusingPAL1(notPAL0)fortheforeground,sinceit’sanimagewithitsowncolors
that have no reason to match the background’s.
If the advance of ind is skipped before uploading the second graphic, its tiles get
written over the same ones already occupied by the first background, corrupting
both. It’sexactlythesamekindoferror,withthesamecause(amismanagedVRAM
index), explained in more detail in the chapter on saving VRAM through manual
spriteloading. It’sworthdeliberatelytestingwhathappensifthislineisremoved,to
learn to recognize the symptom: it doesn’t break anything permanently or damage
anyhardware,andithelpsidentifytheproblemifitshowsupbyaccidentinanother
context.
The result with both planes active combines the background with the foreground drawn on
top, each with its own palette and its own stretch of VRAM.
7. One last experiment: swapping the palettes
To wrap up, let’s see what happens if the palettes are swapped between the two planes: as-
signing PAL1 to the background and PAL0 to the foreground, the reverse of how they’re set
up.
Figure 4: Palettes swapped between the two planes
Palettesswappedbetweenthetwoplanes: theresultisn’tsimply“allred”or“allblue,”buta
confusing mix of colors that doesn’t match either of the two original images.
Unliketheexperimentinsection5.1,wherethepalettewassimplyempty,herebothpalettes
do have color data, just not the data each plane expects: each one ends up painted with the
other’s color palette, and on top of that each image was converted assuming its own color
indexes would match its own palette. The result combines both mismatches at once. This
chapterdoesn’tgointowhythecombinationlooksexactlylikethis;thetopicisrevisitedwith
27

=== PAGE 34 ===
thedetailitdeservesinthechapterdevotedtocreatinggraphics,whenit’sexplainedhowan
imageisconvertedtoMegaDriveformatandexactlywhatrelationshipitscolorindexeshave
with the palette that accompanies it.
8. Testing on real hardware
The compiled project doesn’t only run in the emulator: inside the project folder, in the out
subfolder, there’s a rom.bin file. By copying that file to a flash cartridge (the devices that let
you load homebrew ROMs onto an original Mega Drive or Genesis), you can run it on a real
console connected to a period television. This isn’t a required step for following this manual,
buttryingyourowncodeonoriginalhardwareisoften,forsomeonedoingitforthefirsttime,
one of the most rewarding moments of the whole process.
Review exercises
1. Explain, in your own words, what each of the four fields of an IMAGE line in a .res file is
for (type, name, file, compression, and map optimization).
2. Why does the project need to be recompiled after adding a new line to resources.res
before the new resource name is available in main.c?
3. A teammate loads a background’s palette with PAL_setPalette(PAL2, bg1.palette-
>data, DMA)but,whendrawingtheimage,writesTILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL1, FALSE, FALSE,
FALSE, ind). What will show up on screen, and why?
4. Suppose you add a third plane of graphic information after bg1 and fg1, but forget to
add fg1.tileset->numTile to ind before uploading it. Describe the expected symptom.
5. Why does a value of x = 5 in VDP_drawImageEx() shift the image 40 pixels instead of 5?
What would you need to do if you needed to shift it by exactly 5 pixels?
28

=== PAGE 35 ===
Chapter 8 — Creating Graphics
with Aseprite
The previous chapter showed how to bring an already-existing image onto the Mega Drive
screen: declaringitasanIMAGEresourceinresources.res,convertingitintoatilesethosted
starting at TILE_USERINDEX, loading its palette with PAL_setPalette(), and drawing it with
VDP_drawImageEx(). Throughout that whole process the image arrived ready-made: the PNG
file was already sitting in the res folder, ready to be declared as a resource. This chapter
fillsthatgapbackwardandexplainswherethatfilecomesfrom: howtodrawagraphicfrom
scratch in a way the Mega Drive can display it, what format rules the hardware imposes
before it will accept an image, and how to go from a blank canvas to a PNG compatible with
SGDK’s resource pipeline.
This is not a pixel-art drawing chapter: there are resources dedicated entirely to that disci-
pline,andthat’snotthegoalhere. Thefocusisonthelayerthatalmostnevergetsexplained
in those general materials: what turns an arbitrary drawing into a graphic fit for the Mega
Drive. Thatincludescanvassize,colormode,palettediscipline,andthefinalfileformat. The
editor used throughout the chapter is Aseprite, but nothing explained here is specific to that
program: any pixel-art editor that supports indexed palettes and PNG export works just as
well.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have on hand:
• Having completed Chapter 7, “Displaying Backgrounds on the Mega Drive”: the con-
cepts of tile, VRAM, palette, and plane (BG_A/BG_B) are assumed knowledge, as is the
IMAGE directive in resources.res.
• A pixel-art graphics editor installed. This chapter uses Aseprite as its reference; any
alternative capable of working in indexed mode and exporting PNG is equivalent.
• The SGDK sample project used in the previous chapter, with the res folder and the re-
sources.res file accessible.
1. The right canvas: dimensions and the multiple-of-8 rule
Every graphic for the Mega Drive starts with choosing the right canvas size, and that choice
depends on what the image will be used for. If the goal is to fill a single screen with no
scrolling, or just to test a result, 320×224 pixels is enough: the visible resolution in the
console’s standard mode. But if the plane is going to scroll later on — something revisited
furtheralonginthismanual—it’sbettertodrawdirectlyattheactualsizetheVDPreserves
foreachplane: 512×256pixels. Drawingat320×224andthenrunningintoemptygapsonce
29

=== PAGE 36 ===
scrollingkicksinisn’tacodingmistake: it’ssimplynothavingplannedfortherealsizeofthe
tile board from the start.
The dialog for creating a new canvas asks, besides the size, for a color mode. It’s best to
chooseRGBatthisfirststep,eventhoughthefinaldestinationisanindexedimage;thereason
is explained in section 5, and it has to do with a very concrete problem that only shows up
once you switch to indexed mode with an overly large palette. The initial background color
(white, black, or transparent), on the other hand, is just a matter of drawing convenience
withnoeffectonthefinalresult,exceptintheparticularcaseofagraphicwithtransparency,
which is revisited in section 7.
Whatever size is chosen, there’s one restriction that isn’t negotiable: both the width and the
heightofanyMegaDrivegraphicmustbemultiplesof8. Thereasonisthesameonealready
coveredwhendiscussingtheVDP:VRAMdoesn’tstoreloosepixels,but8×8blocks—tiles—
andthere’snoway torepresenta fractionofatile. Awidthof 320isvalid (anexact40tiles);
a width of 321 is not, and SGDK’s resource compiler rejects it as soon as it tries to convert
the image into a tileset, halting the build with an explicit error.
Figure 5: Compile error due to a width that isn’t a multiple of 8
SGDK’s resource compiler refuses to generate the tileset and halts compilation when the
declared width isn’t a multiple of 8.
This kind of error tends to show up when an image is cropped or resized by hand and its
exact dimensions get lost track of; before exporting any graphic, it’s worth double-checking
itsdimensionsintheeditoritself. Theruleappliesequallytobackgroundsandsprites: 8, 16,
24, 32, 320, 512… any multiple of 8 is valid; any other number is not.
2. The Mega Drive palette in the editor
The Mega Drive can display up to 64 simultaneous colors on screen, organized into four
palettes of 16 colors each (PAL0 through PAL3, already covered when describing the VDP).
30

=== PAGE 37 ===
That limit isn’t a retro-style suggestion: it’s just as structural as the multiple-of-8 rule, and
any graphic being drawn has to respect it from the outset, not adjust to it afterward.
Aseprite—likemostpixel-arteditorsaimedatretroconsoles—shipswithpredefinedpalettes
for several classic systems: Atari 2600, Commodore 64, Game Boy, Game Boy Color, Master
System, among others. The Mega Drive, however, usually isn’t among them by default. That
means you need to import a Mega Drive palette from an external file: several circulate on
homebrew community forums and repositories, and any one that faithfully reproduces the
hardware’s 512 possible colors — 9 bits of color, split across 3 bits per channel — will do the
job. Thismanualdoesn’tshipanyparticularpalettefile;it’senoughtoobtainorgenerateone
that’s faithful to that bit distribution.
Once imported and applied to the canvas, the editor’s palette panel is ready to work with.
Sincethatpalettewillbeusedacrosseverygraphicintheproject,it’sworthavoidinghaving
tore-importiteverytimeanewfileiscreated: Asepriteletsyousetthecurrentpaletteasthe
default (the “Save Palette as Default” option in the palette menu), so that every new canvas
includes it automatically.
3. The 8×8 grid and the discipline of drawing tile by tile
Since the VDP organizes everything into 8×8-pixel blocks, it’s worth making that organiza-
tion visible while drawing, not just at export time. Most pixel-art editors let you overlay a
configurable grid on the canvas; for Mega Drive graphics it makes sense to set it exactly to
8-pixel steps, so each cell corresponds to an actual VRAM tile.
This isn’t an aesthetic preference. Seeing each tile’s boundaries while drawing helps antici-
patehowwellSGDK’sautomatictilededuplication(coveredinsection8.3)willbeabletokick
in, and it avoids surprises when a shape ends up split awkwardly between two neighboring
tiles. Thegridcanbeadjustedtoothersizesdependingonwhat’sbeingdrawn—forexample,
16×16tovisuallygroupsetsoffourtiles,asseeninsection7—buttheunderlyingreference
should always be thinkable in multiples of 8.
4. Keeping the 16-color limit in check: the tally column
Each individual graphic — each image that ends up converted into an SGDK IMAGE resource
—is limitedto asingle 16-color palette, even thoughthe hardware hasfour availablein total.
While drawing a scene with several elements (sky, clouds, ground, and eventually sprites),
it’s easy to lose track of how many distinct colors have been added, especially if the editor
doesn’t display that count prominently.
Apracticaltrickforkeepingcountistosetasideastripoftilesoutsidetheareathatwilllater
be exported, and use it as a visual log: every time a new color is introduced into the scene, a
swatch of that color gets added to the strip too. A glance at that column is enough to know,
at any moment, how many distinct colors the graphic has used so far, without opening any
additionalpanel. Thiscolumnispurelyaworkingtool: itgetscroppedoutbeforeexportand
isn’t part of the final graphic.
The habit of counting colors matters much more in complex graphics than in a simple sky-
clouds-groundexample: inamoredetailedsceneit’seasytogoover16withoutnoticing,and
fixing it after everything has already been drawn is considerably more work than keeping
count from the start.
31

=== PAGE 38 ===
5. From RGB to indexed: trimming the palette and export-
ing the PNG
Withthedrawingfinished,therearethreestepsleftbeforethefileisreadyforSGDK:reducing
thecanvaspalettedowntoonlythecolorsactuallyused,switchingthecolormodefromRGB
to indexed, and saving as PNG. All three are mechanical, but each has a reason behind it
that’s worth understanding, not just executing.
The first step removes from the file’s palette any color that wasn’t actually used in the draw-
ing: what’s left, for example, are the three or four colors actually painted, instead of the
hundreds carried by the full palette imported in section 2. Most editors — Aseprite included
—offerafunctiontoautomaticallygeneratethecanvaspalettefromthecolorspresentinthe
image. This step also doubles, conveniently, as an extra check on the 16-color limit: if, after
generatingit,youendupwith17,18,ormore,that’sanunmistakablesignthatatsomepoint
in the drawing an extra color slipped in without notice — perhaps a barely-different shade
that went unnoticed — and the graphic is worth reviewing before moving on.
Thesecondstepchangesthefile’scolormodefromRGBtoindexed,viathecanvasproperties
menu. Why do this at the end and not at the beginning? Many editors let you work directly
in indexed mode from the very start, but doing so before trimming the palette can produce
unexpected results if the starting palette is very large. The palette imported in section 2 can
cover all 512 possible hardware colors, and pixel-art editors usually impose a practical limit
well below that on the number of entries an indexed palette can hold — in Aseprite a figure
around 256 slots is often cited, though it’s worth checking the exact value for the version
you’reusing,sinceitcanvary. Ifyouswitchtoindexedmodewithapalettethatexceedsthat
limit, the entries above the cutoff aren’t silently discarded: they get reassigned to already-
occupied slots, and the visible color at those slots changes abruptly and unpredictably.
Figure 6: Colors shifted when indexing with a 512-color palette
Whenswitchingtoindexedmodewithall512colorsstillloaded,theupperhalfofthepalette
is preserved, but the lower half shifts: whites that turn yellow, blues that turn purple.
32

=== PAGE 39 ===
Working first in RGB, where each color is identified by its actual value rather than a palette
slot, and only switching to indexed once the canvas palette has been trimmed down to the
few colors actually used, avoids this problem entirely: with a palette of 16 entries or fewer,
that limit is never reached. That limit (somewhere around 256 slots) is a quirk of the editor,
notoftheMegaDrivehardware: itshouldn’tbeconfusedwiththereal,muchstricterlimitof
16 colors per individual graphic already covered in section 4.
With the palette trimmed and the color mode already set to indexed, the last step is to save
thefile. Thenamecanbeanything,buttheformatisn’tnegotiable: ithastobesavedasPNG,
the only image format that SGDK’s resource pipeline — covered in Chapter 7 with the IMAGE
directive in resources.res — knows how to interpret.
6. Bringing the graphic into SGDK and seeing it on screen
With the PNG already exported, bringing it into the project requires no new steps beyond
what was covered in Chapter 7: it’s enough to replace, inside resources.res, the name of
the image file that the already-declared resource references. There’s no need to change the
resource’sownname(bg1,inthisexample)ortouchasinglelineof main.c,becausethecode
still refers to the same identifier; only the file behind it changes.
IMAGE bg1 "background - 512 256.png" BEST ALL
Saving the resource file and rebuilding the project is all that’s left to see the newly created
graphic running in the emulator. This is, in short, the full loop: draw respecting size and
palette, export as an indexed PNG, declare (or update) the resource in resources.res, and
rebuild. It’s the same loop for any future graphic, whether it’s a background, a tileset, or a
sprite.
7. A second graphic: transparency and depth
The same procedure repeats identically for a second graphic meant for a different plane —
forexample,oneclosertotheviewerthanthebackgroundalreadydrawn,withtreesorother
elements that will later in this manual be combined via independent per-plane scrolling —
with two differences from the first one.
Thefirstshowsuprightinthecanvascreationdialog: insteadofawhiteorblackbackground,
it’s best to choose the transparent background option, so that the areas of the graphic left
undrawn show, in the editor’s preview, whatever is behind them.
The actual mechanism behind that transparency has a quirk specific to indexed color worth
spelling out: there’s no special transparency color reserved by the format. What actually
happens is that, by convention, both the editor and later SGDK treat the palette’s first entry
— index 0 — as transparent, whatever the actual color assigned to it happens to be. It could
bepink,green,oranythingelse;sinceit’sneverdrawnonscreen,thecoloritselfisirrelevant.
What does matter is that no other element of the drawing uses that first palette slot, even by
accident, because it would end up invisible without the editor warning about the problem.
Thetransparent-backgroundoptioninthecreationdialogissimplyaneditorconveniencefor
previewing how that convention will look in practice.
Theseconddifferenceisoneofscale: ifthissecondgraphiccontainslarger,morespaced-out
elements than a continuous texture like a sky, it can help to set the grid to a larger multiple
of 8 — 16×16, for example — to visually group sets of four tiles without losing track of the
real unit. The 16-color limit and the tally-column discipline from section 4 still apply just the
same. The rest of the process — generating the canvas palette, switching to indexed mode,
33

=== PAGE 40 ===
saving as PNG, updating resources.res — is identical to what was covered in the previous
sections.
8. The Mega Drive’s color model: palettes, VRAM, and
their real limits
With at least one graphic already working, this section pauses to look at how the indexed
color used since section 5 actually works under the hood, and at two hardware aspects left
out of the previous examples.
8.1 Indexed color as a paint-by-numbers book
Indexed color mode can be thought of with the same logic as one of those paint-by-numbers
books that put a number inside each area to indicate which color to use: the image data
doesn’t directly store “this pixel is light blue,” but rather “this pixel uses color number 6,”
and it’s the palette, kept separately, that defines which actual color corresponds to number
6 at any given moment. The Mega Drive numbers its 64 possible on-screen colors from 0 to
63, and works under exactly that same numbering logic.
Thepracticalconsequenceisthatchangingwhichactualcoloroccupiesapaletteslotinstantly
changesthecolorofeverypixelusingthatslot,withoutneedingtotouchasinglepixelofthe
image. Swapping two entries in an already-indexed graphic’s palette — light blue and white,
say—makeseverythingthatusedtobelightblueturnwhiteandviceversa,acrosstheentire
image at once.
Figure 7: Background with two palette entries swapped
Thesamebackgroundfromsection4withtwoentriesofitsalready-indexedpaletteswapped:
the light blue sky with green clouds appears inverted without a single pixel of the drawing
having been touched.
34

=== PAGE 41 ===
Far from being a mere curiosity, this property is the basis of a technique widely used in
commercial games of the era: palette cycling, which consists of reassigning, frame by frame
in real time, which actual colors occupy certain palette slots, without redrawing or moving a
single tile. The visual result is a smooth animation — flowing water, blinking lights, pulsing
logos — achieved at a fraction of the processing cost that redrawing the scene would take.
The opening logo and the neon sign in the introduction to Streets of Rage, for example, use
exactly this mechanism.
8.2 A limitation of the tool used so far, not of the hardware: per-tile
palettes
All the code seen up to this point assigns a single palette to an entire background plane,
via the pal parameter of TILE_ATTR_FULL() in the call to VDP_drawImageEx() from Chapter 7.
It’s worth keeping in mind that this is a limitation of how the function has been used so far,
not a limitation of the hardware: the Mega Drive’s VDP actually allows a different palette to
be assigned to each individual tile within the same plane, not just to the plane as a whole. A
singlebackgroundcouldcombinetilesusingPAL0,PAL1,PAL2,andPAL3simultaneously,which
enables,forinstance,sceneswithfarmorethan16colorsvisibleatonce,sensiblydistributed
across different areas.
Takingadvantageofthattile-by-tileflexibilitywiththetoolsuseduptothispoint—apixel-art
editor plus VDP_drawImageEx() — is cumbersome, since it would require manually chopping
uptheimageandassigningeachfragmenttoabasetilewithitsownpalparameter. Thereare
third-partytools, outsideAsepriteitself, aimed specificallyat assigningpalette andtileprior-
ity visually over an already-drawn graphic; it’s worth looking into them if a project needs to
takeadvantageofthisflexibilitysystematically,thoughtheyaren’tpartofthebasicworkflow
covered in this chapter.
8.3 VRAM and automatic tile deduplication
The Mega Drive’s VRAM stores tiles, not a continuous grid of pixels, and its capacity — al-
though considerably larger than that of 8-bit systems like the NES or the Master System —
isn’t infinite: it has to be split between the background, the foreground, and the sprites for
everything on screen. The most effective strategy for not running it dry is, simply, reusing
tiles: a background made of a handful of tiles repeated in a pattern (a tileset) takes up much
less space than the same scene drawn as a single image with no repetition.
SGDKhelpswiththisautomatically: whenconvertinganimageintoatileset,itdetectswhich
tilesare,infact,thesametileflippedhorizontallyorverticallyrelativetoonealreadypresent,
andinsteadofduplicatingthedatainVRAMitstoresasingletileandmarkstherestwiththe
correspondingflipflag(thesameflipH/flipVfromTILE_ATTR_FULL()alreadyusedinChapter
7). An emulator with VRAM debugging tools lets you inspect this savings directly.
The emulator’s VRAM debugging tool shows the CRAM with all four palettes loaded and, be-
lowit,theindividualtiles: asinglemarkedtilereappearsflippedinseveralpositionswithout
having been duplicated in memory.
The practical takeaway is that, when designing a graphic — especially a background meant
for a full level and not just a test screen — it’s worth thinking of it from the start as a tileset:
arelativelysmallsetofdistincttiles, combinedandrepeated(flipsincluded)tobuildascene
muchlargerthantheunique-tilecountwouldsuggest. There’snoneedtomanagetileflipping
byhand: SGDKdetectsitonitsown. Whatdoesdependontheartistisdrawinginawaythat
gives it tiles to detect in the first place.
35

=== PAGE 42 ===
Figure 8: VRAM dump with one tile flipped in several positions
Review exercises
1. A graphic is drawn at 300×200 pixels and an attempt is made to declare it as an IMAGE
resource in resources.res. Explain why SGDK will reject it and what minimal change
would fix it.
2. A teammate switches their canvas’s color mode from RGB to indexed as soon as they
start drawing, without first trimming the imported 512-color palette. After drawing a
light-blue sky, they notice part of the image shows shades they never painted. What’s
going on, and at which step of the workflow should they have intervened to avoid it?
3. Why is a single Mega Drive graphic limited to 16 colors and not the 64 the console
can display in total? Relate your answer to the concept of palettes (PAL0 through PAL3)
already covered when describing the VDP.
4. Explain, in your own words, why the transparency of a graphic in indexed mode doesn’t
depend on any particular color but on a palette slot, and what visual glitch results if
something is accidentally drawn using that slot.
5. What’s the difference between flipping a tile (flipH/flipV) and duplicating it, in terms
of VRAM usage? Why is it in a Mega Drive artist’s interest to design backgrounds with
reusabletilesinmindfromthestart,ratherthanfixingthegraphicafternoticingittakes
up too much VRAM?
36

=== PAGE 43 ===
Chapter 9 — Scroll and Parallax
Scrolling
Chapter 7 left a static image on each of the VDP’s two background planes. This chapter sets
those same images in motion: it’s the first step toward scrolling and, in particular, toward
parallax scrolling, the technique so characteristic of 16-bit games in which the background
and foreground move at different speeds to suggest depth. Without parallax, a game world
looks oddly flat; with it, even in its simplest form, it starts to feel three-dimensional.
Chapter 2 already introduced, at a conceptual level, the three scroll granularities offered
by the VDP: whole-plane, per-tile (or per-column, on the vertical axis), and per-line. Here
theygetcodeforthefirsttime,startingwiththesimplestofthethree: whole-planescrolling,
whichmovestheentirescreenatonce. Theothertwovariants—per-tile/columnandper-line,
whichallowmovingstripsofthescreenatdifferentspeedswithinthesameplane,theclassic
effectusedinracinggamesorcertainbossfights—arementionedbutnotdevelopedindepth
yet: theyrequiremorecodeandadeeperunderstandingofhowVRAMisorganized,andthey
are territory for a dedicated chapter on levels with scrolling that follows the player, later in
this manual.
Implementing plane scrolling requires only a couple more lines of code beyond what was
already written in Chapter 7. What it does demand, and in depth, is understanding several
underlying ideas: what the difference is between specifying a position in tiles versus pixels,
whatthreedistinctsectionsatypicalSGDKprogramhasandwhathappensifcodeiswritten
in the wrong section, and why the VDP stores each plane at a fixed size of 512×256 pixels
even though the visible screen is much smaller.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Completed Chapter 7, “Displaying Backgrounds: BG_A/BG_B and VDP_drawImageEx”:
this chapter builds on the same project, with the same two planes (bg1 on BG_B and fg1
on BG_A) already declared, palettized, and drawn on screen.
• An understanding of the concepts of tile, VRAM, and palette covered in Chapter 2, as
well as the distinction between BG_A (foreground) and BG_B (distant background).
• The fix16/fix32 fixed-point types introduced in Chapter 6, which reappear toward the
end of this chapter.
• Basic knowledge of C: global versus local variables, and the structure of a while loop.
37

=== PAGE 44 ===
1. Configuring the scroll mode: VDP_setScrollingMode
The VDP doesn’t move a plane simply because the programmer changes an x or y coordinate
everyframe: firstitmustbeexplicitlytoldwhatmodethatplane’sscrollwilloperatein. That
configuration is done once, with the function VDP_setScrollingMode():
void VDP_setScrollingMode(u16 hscroll, u16 vscroll);
The two parameters configure, separately, the horizontal and vertical scroll modes. As pre-
viewed in Chapter 2, the horizontal mode offers three possible granularities:
• HSCROLL_PLANE — the offset is applied to the whole plane: the entire screen moves uni-
formly. It’s the simplest mode and the only one used in this chapter.
• HSCROLL_TILE—theoffsetcanbedefinedindependentlyforeach8-pixel-tallblock(atile).
This allows, for example, different horizontal strips of the screen to move at different
speeds.
• HSCROLL_LINE — the offset can be defined line by line (each 1-pixel-tall line), the finest
granularity possible and the one used by the more elaborate scroll effects, such as the
curves of a racetrack.
The vertical mode offers two granularities: VSCROLL_PLANE, analogous to HSCROLL_PLANE (the
whole plane moves as a unit), and VSCROLL_COLUMN, which allows an independent offset per
16-pixel-widecolumn. Unlikehorizontalscrolling,theMegaDrivedoesnotofferaline-by-line
vertical scroll mode; the hardware itself gives preference to fine horizontal scrolling, on the
logic that the vast majority of games scroll mainly in that direction.
If old sample code ever turns up using a constant called VSCROLL_2TILE for vertical scrolling,
keepinmindthatit’sdeprecated: SGDKreplaceditwithVSCROLL_COLUMN,whichfillsthesame
role (independent offset per vertical strip) with a more precise name. Using VSCROLL_2TILE
directly in SGDK 2.11 no longer compiles.
Since this chapter deals with the simplest case, it uses whole-plane scrolling in both direc-
tions:
VDP_setScrollingMode(HSCROLL_PLANE, VSCROLL_PLANE);
Don’t forget the semicolon. A common typo when writing this line for the first
time is forgetting the trailing semicolon, which produces a compilation error. This
isn’t specific to this function — it applies to any statement in C — but it’s worth
keepinginmindbecausethecompiler’serrormessageinthesecasesdoesn’talways
point to the exact line of the omission, but to the following line.
2. Moving the plane: VDP_setHorizontalScroll and
VDP_setVerticalScroll
Withthescrollmodeconfigured,what’sstillmissingisthepartthatactuallymovestheplane
frame by frame: telling the VDP, on every pass of the main loop, what the current offset is.
Two functions handle that, one per axis:
void VDP_setHorizontalScroll(VDPPlane plane, s16 value);
void VDP_setVerticalScroll(VDPPlane plane, s16 value);
The first parameter is, again, the plane the offset is applied to (BG_A or BG_B). The second,
value, is the offset value, with one important detail that sets these two functions apart from
VDP_drawImageEx(): here value is measured in pixels, not tiles. A value of 8 shifts the plane
8 pixels — that is, exactly one tile — not 8 tiles (64 pixels).
38

=== PAGE 45 ===
VDP_drawImageEx() uses tiles; VDP_setHorizontalScroll() uses pixels. This is a
commonsourceofconfusion: thexandycoordinatesofVDP_drawImageEx(),already
usedinChapter7topositionanimage,aremeasuredintiles(multiplesof8pixels).
ThevaluespassedtoVDP_setHorizontalScroll()andVDP_setVerticalScroll(),on
the other hand, are measured directly in pixels, and although they often appear
together in the same program, they don’t share a unit of measurement.
Fortheverticalaxis,apositivevaluemovestheplaneupandanegativeonemovesitdown(it
helps to think of the value as how much “the window” looking at the plane is shifted, rather
thanwhichwaythecontentvisuallymoves). It’sbettertoverifytheexactsignexperimentally
for each case rather than memorize it: what matters is that value is of type s16, a signed
integer, so both directions are available without any additional function.
3. Where to put each line of code: the three sections of
main()
Beforewritingtheframe-by-frameoffsetcode,it’sworthpausingonapointthatisn’texclusive
toscrollingbutappliestoanyprogrambuiltwithSGDK,andwhichbecomesespeciallyvisible
in this chapter because a misplaced line produces a spectacularly wrong result. In practice,
every SGDK main() is organized into three clearly distinct sections:
1. Global section: everything declared before int main(), outside any function. These
are variables that need to exist for the entire life of the program and be visible from
differentfunctions(or,asinthischapter,tokeeptheirvaluefromoneframetothenext).
2. Initial setup section: thestretchofcodebetweentheopeningbraceof main()andthe
while(1)thatstartsthemainloop. Everythinghererunsexactlyonce,whentheprogram
starts: loading palettes, drawing the backgrounds, configuring the scroll mode.
3. Main loop section: the contents of while(1) { ... }. Everything here runs over and
over, once per frame, for as long as the program is running.
The chapter’s full code, now with the offset variable declared globally and scrolling working,
looks like this:
u16 ind = TILE_USERINDEX;
int hscroll_offset = 0;
int main()
{
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, bg1.palette->data, DMA);
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, &bg1, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind), 0,
↪ 0, FALSE, TRUE);
ind += bg1.tileset->numTile;
PAL_setPalette(PAL1, fg1.palette->data, DMA);
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_A, &fg1, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL1, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind), 0,
↪ 0, FALSE, TRUE);
ind += fg1.tileset->numTile;
VDP_setScrollingMode(HSCROLL_PLANE, VSCROLL_PLANE);
while(1)
{
VDP_setHorizontalScroll(BG_B, hscroll_offset);
hscroll_offset += 1;
39

=== PAGE 46 ===
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return (0);
}
The variable hscroll_offset is declared globally, together with ind, because it needs to pre-
serve its value from one frame to the next: if it were declared inside the while loop, it would
reset to 0 on every pass and the plane would never advance. Inside the loop, each pass does
three things: it tells the VDP the current scroll position with VDP_setHorizontalScroll(),
increments that position by 1 for the next pass, and calls SYS_doVBlankProcess().
SYS_doVBlankProcess() synchronizes the program with the VDP’s vertical blanking interval
(VBlank), the brief span between frames during which the screen isn’t being drawn and
it’s safe to update VRAM without producing visual artifacts. For application-level program-
ming, it’s enough to know that this call must be present once per loop pass, typically at the
end. In SGDK versions prior to 1.60 the equivalent function was called VDP_waitVSync();
if that name shows up in old projects, it fills the same role and should be replaced with
SYS_doVBlankProcess() when porting to SGDK 2.11.
With this code, the intended effect is already achieved: the background scrolls continuously
to the right, at a rate of 1 pixel per frame (which on the Mega Drive amounts to roughly 60
pixels per second, given that the system runs at 60 frames per second in the NTSC variant).
Reversing the scroll direction or changing its speed doesn’t require any new function: it’s
enoughtochangetheincrementaddedtohscroll_offsetoneachpass. Subtractinginstead
of adding reverses the direction; adding or subtracting a number greater than 1 speeds up
the movement.
hscroll_offset -= 2; // moves to the left, twice as fast
The scroll can look a bit choppier in an emulator than on a physical console con-
nected to a period-accurate TV: different emulators handle timing and video filter-
ing differently. If it’s possible to test the same rom.bin on real hardware, the final
result looks better there.
4. A deliberate mistake: what happens if code goes in the
wrong section
Thedistinctionbetweentheinitialsetupsectionandthemainloop,presentedintheprevious
section as a simple organizational convention, has very concrete consequences if it isn’t re-
spected. To see this clearly, it’s worth deliberately reproducing a common mistake: moving
the palette-loading and image-drawing calls, which should run only once, inside the while
loop, so that they run every frame.
while(1)
{
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, bg1.palette->data, DMA);
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, &bg1, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind), 0,
↪ 0, FALSE, TRUE);
ind += bg1.tileset->numTile;
PAL_setPalette(PAL1, fg1.palette->data, DMA);
40

=== PAGE 47 ===
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_A, &fg1, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL1, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind), 0,
↪ 0, FALSE, TRUE);
ind += fg1.tileset->numTile;
VDP_setHorizontalScroll(BG_B, hscroll_offset);
hscroll_offset += 1;
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
The result, far from being a simple flicker or slowdown, is obvious visual corruption almost
immediately: blocksoftileswithcolorsandpatternsthatdon’tmatcheitherofthetwooriginal
images.
The cause is exactly the VRAM bookkeeping discipline mentioned in Chapter 7. The vari-
able ind is global and is never reset: each pass of the loop adds bg1.tileset->numTile and
fg1.tileset->numTileagaintoitsalready-incrementedvalue,sooneveryframethetilesare
being written to a VRAM position that’s different — and increasingly further away — from
where they should be. Sixty times per second, the program keeps writing new tiles to VRAM
addresses that advance out of control, until they end up overwriting positions already used
by something else (or, simply, until the available VRAM space runs out and the count wraps
around). The visual result is the mix of incorrect tile data described above.
Thegeneralrule: configureonce,updateeveryframe. Thisexperimentserves
to fix a rule that’s worth applying from here on to any SGDK program: everything
that prepares an initial state — loading a palette, uploading tiles to VRAM, config-
uring the scroll mode — belongs in the setup section, before the while. Everything
thatneedstobereevaluatedeveryframe—readingthecontroller,movingasprite,
updating the scroll position — belongs in the main loop. Mixing the two doesn’t al-
ways produce a result as visually dramatic as this experiment, but it almost always
produces some kind of error that’s hard to diagnose if you don’t know what to look
for.
Revertingthechange—movingthoselinesbacktotheinitialsetupsection,beforethewhile
— restores the correct behavior.
5. The real size of a plane: 512×256 pixels
With horizontal scrolling working, a problem shows up that no code error explains: once the
scroll moves far enough, the plane starts showing areas with no graphics, like black gaps.
The cause is a hardware characteristic, not a program defect. The VDP doesn’t store each
plane at exactly the size of the visible screen (320×224 pixels in standard mode); instead it
reserves a much larger tile board in VRAM: 512×256 pixels, that is, 64×32 tiles. The reason
isthatthisextraspaceletstheVDPalwayshavetilesalreadyloadedabove,below,totheleft,
and to the right of the visible area, so that scrolling can show new content instantly at the
edgesofthescreeninsteadofhavingtoloaditonthefly,framebyframe,whichwouldbetoo
slow to sustain 60 frames per second.
The problem arises when the image drawn on the plane is smaller than that 512×256 board:
theVDPhasextratilesreserved,butthosetileswereneverfilledwithcontent,sotheyappear
empty (black gaps) as soon as the scroll advances far enough to reveal them. To make the
problem more visible, it’s enough to also enable vertical scrolling on the same plane, using
the same offset variable:
41

=== PAGE 48 ===
VDP_setHorizontalScroll(BG_B, hscroll_offset);
VDP_setVerticalScroll(BG_B, hscroll_offset);
hscroll_offset -= 2;
Figure 9: Empty gaps when scrolling outside the area occupied by the original image
With horizontal and vertical scrolling active on a 320×224 image, the rest of the plane’s
512×256 board becomes visible: outside the area occupied by the original image there is
nothing but empty gaps.
The VDP also doesn’t reserve the same amount of extra space on both axes: it keeps propor-
tionally less vertical margin than horizontal, which is no accident, since the vast majority of
MegaDrivegamesscrollmainlyalongthehorizontalaxis,andthehardwareisdesignedwith
that priority in mind.
Thevalueof512×256pixels(64×32tiles)isthedefaultconfigurationandthemost
common one in practice, and it’s the one used in this chapter. SGDK does, how-
ever, allow configuring planes of other sizes (32, 64, or 128 tiles per axis, in any
combination) via the function VDP_setPlaneSize(), as long as the available VRAM
isenoughfortheresultingboard. Thisoptionisn’tneededyetforwhat’scoveredin
this chapter, but it’s worth knowing that plane size is configurable and not a fixed
hardware constant.
6. The solution: images at the plane’s full size
The solution to the gap problem is, at bottom, very straightforward: if the plane reserves
512×256 pixels of tiles, it needs to be given an image of that same size so that no areas are
left unfilled.
The original 320×224-pixel image, next to one of the new 512×256 replacement images; the
checkered background marks the transparent areas.
42

=== PAGE 49 ===
Figure 10: Comparison between the original 320×224 image and the new 512×256 one
An important practical detail when replacing an image with a larger one: there’s no need
to change the resource names (bg1, fg1) already used by the code in main.c. It’s enough to
replace, inside resources.res, the name of the image file each resource references:
IMAGE bg1 "background - 512 256.png" BEST ALL
IMAGE fg1 "foreground - 512 256.png" BEST ALL
A trick to force resource recompilation. Sometimes, after editing only re-
sources.res, SGDK doesn’t reliably detect the change and keeps using the pre-
viously compiled image data. A practical and widely used trick to force recompila-
tion is: type any character into main.c (for example, a stray letter) and save; then
delete that character and save again. That double save of main.c is enough for the
build system to notice that something changed and reprocess resources.res from
scratch. It’snotanelegantsolution,butit’seffectiveandavoidshavingtomanually
delete intermediate files.
Whenrecompilingwithanimagetallerthanthepreviousone,anadditionalverticalmisalign-
ment can appear: the result looks shifted from what was expected. The solution is the same
positioning tool already used in Chapter 7, the y parameter of VDP_drawImageEx(), this time
with a negative value to shift the image upward:
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, &bg1, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind), 0, -4,
↪ FALSE, TRUE);
// ...
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_A, &fg1, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL1, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind), 0, -4,
↪ FALSE, TRUE);
Thisparameterismeasuredintiles,asalreadyexplainedinChapter7: avalueof-4shiftsthe
image 4 tiles (32 pixels) upward from its original position. With this adjustment, both planes
— now at the full 512×256 size — end up correctly aligned, with no visible gaps at any point
43

=== PAGE 50 ===
along the scroll’s range.
7. Two speeds: parallax proper
Uptonow,boththebackground(BG_B)andtheforeground(BG_A)moved—whentheymoved
at all — at the same speed, controlled by the same variable hscroll_offset. That’s not par-
allax scrolling in the strict sense: it’s just a single plane in motion. The depth effect that
gives the technique its name only appears once each plane moves at a different speed, typi-
cally with the foreground moving faster than the distant background, mimicking how nearby
objects appear to move faster than distant ones when you move in real life.
Implementingitrequiresnonewfunction: it’senoughtodeclareasecond,independentglobal
offset variable and use it to move BG_A:
u16 ind = TILE_USERINDEX;
int hscroll_offset = 0;
int hscroll_offset_fore = 0;
int main()
{
// ... palette loading and drawing of bg1 and fg1, as before ...
VDP_setScrollingMode(HSCROLL_PLANE, VSCROLL_PLANE);
while(1)
{
VDP_setHorizontalScroll(BG_B, hscroll_offset);
hscroll_offset -= 1;
VDP_setHorizontalScroll(BG_A, hscroll_offset_fore);
hscroll_offset_fore -= 2;
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return (0);
}
Withthebackgroundadvancingat1pixelperframeandtheforegroundat2pixelsperframe
— twice the speed — the result is already recognizable parallax scrolling: the foreground
visibly glides faster than the background, suggesting it’s closer to the camera.
A visible limitation: the repeat seam. When a plane’s image is narrower than
the full scroll range it’s meant to cover, at some point the pattern starts repeating
and a “seam” or edge can be noticed where one copy of the image ends and the
next begins. This is a natural limitation of working with a fixed-width image rather
than a procedurally generated level or one of arbitrary width, and it becomes less
noticeable the wider and more varied the source image is. Long levels that follow
theplayer,withsectionsmuchwiderthanasinglescreen,arerevisitedlaterinthis
manual.
44

=== PAGE 51 ===
8. The limit of integers: why int isn’t enough
With parallax working at speeds of 1 and 2 pixels per frame, a natural question comes up:
what happens if a slower speed is needed, for example half a screen’s worth of scroll every
two frames, that is, 0.5 pixels per frame? Trying that value directly doesn’t work:
hscroll_offset -= 0.5; // produces no visible movement
Theplanestayscompletelystill. ThereasonhasnothingtodowiththeVDPoranyofthescroll
functions: it’s a limitation of the very data type used for hscroll_offset. It was declared
as int, an integer, which by definition cannot represent fractions. When 0.5 is subtracted
from an int, the C compiler truncates that result to the nearest integer before storing it; the
practicaleffectisthatthestoredintegervalueneverchangesfromoneframetothenext,and
therefore neither does the scroll position. The same problem shows up with any increment
smaller than 1 in absolute value, not just 0.5: 0.8 subtracted repeatedly from an int still
rounds to 0 at every step, so the visual result is identical to not moving the plane at all.
Thesolution,alreadyfamiliarfromChapter6,istouseafixed-pointtypeinsteadofaninteger.
fix32 (or its lighter variant fix16) reserves part of its bits to represent a fraction, instead of
using all its bits for the integer part. Declaring the offset as fix32 and using the FIX32()
macro to express the fractional increment, subtracting half a pixel per frame does produce a
real accumulated offset:
fix32 hscroll_offset_f = FIX32(0);
// inside the loop:
hscroll_offset_f -= FIX32(0.5);
VDP_setHorizontalScroll(BG_B, F32_toInt(hscroll_offset_f));
The key is in the last line: VDP_setHorizontalScroll() still expects an s16 in whole pixels,
so the fixed-point value accumulates with its fraction intact in hscroll_offset_f, and is only
converted to an integer with F32_toInt() at the moment it’s passed to the VDP. Even though
you’llneverseeless-than-one-pixelmovementinasingleframe(thepixelitselfisthesmallest
unit that can be shown on screen), the accumulated fraction means that, every two frames,
the resulting integer value does advance by one pixel, achieving the targeted average speed
of 0.5 pixels per frame. This same technique — accumulating in fixed point and converting
to an integer only at the end — is what SGDK uses internally for sprite coordinates, and it
comes up again in any situation that requires a fractional speed, such as a character’s jump.
Integers (int, u16, s16, etc.) are enough for speeds of 1 pixel per frame or more, but any
speed slower than that requires a fixed-point type such as fix32 or fix16.
Review exercises
1. Explainwhythevariablethataccumulatesthescrolloffset(forexample,hscroll_offset)
hastobedeclaredoutsidemain(),andwhatwouldhappenifitweredeclaredinsidethe
while loop instead of outside it.
2. AteammatemistakenlymovesthecalltoVDP_setScrollingMode()insidethewhileloop,
along with the rest of the per-frame update code. Unlike moving the PAL_setPalette()
and VDP_drawImageEx() calls, this particular call doesn’t re-upload data to VRAM every
frame. Even so, why is it still bad practice to leave it there, even though the program
doesn’t get visually corrupted the same way as in section 4?
3. You want a plane to shift exactly 3 tiles to the right using VDP_setHorizontalScroll().
Whatvalueshouldbepassedtothefunction? Justifytheanswerbasedonthisfunction’s
45

=== PAGE 52 ===
unit of measurement.
4. A 320×224-pixel image is drawn on a plane, and horizontal and vertical scrolling are
enabled on that plane. Describe what will be seen when scrolling beyond the edge of
the original image, and propose the correct solution without resorting yet to fixed-point
types or per-tile scrolling.
5. Whydoesthestatementhscroll_offset -= 0.5;producenomovementifhscroll_offset
wasdeclaredasint? Rewriteitusingfix32,FIX32(),andF32_toInt()sothattheplane
shifts, on average, 0.5 pixels per frame.
46

=== PAGE 53 ===
Chapter 10 — H40 and H32
Resolution Modes
How to switch horizontal resolution with a single line of code, and what practical criteria
come into play when choosing between H40 and H32
The chapter on the VDP already introduced, at a conceptual level, the Mega Drive’s two
horizontal resolution modes and their associated sprite limits. This chapter picks that idea
backupfromthepracticalside: whatcodeisneededtoactivateeachmode,whatsideeffects
that change brings, and why much of the industry ended up using one mode or the other
depending on the situation.
1. Quick recap: H40 and H32
As a reminder, the Mega Drive supports two horizontal resolutions:
• H40: 320×224pixels(40tiles,8pixelswideeach). Thisisthedefaultmodeandtheone
used by the vast majority of commercial games. It allows up to 80 simultaneous sprites
on screen, with a maximum of 20 per horizontal line.
• H32: 256×224 pixels (32 tiles wide). Sprite limits drop to 64 on screen and 16 per line.
The reduction in sprites under H32 isn’t arbitrary: by displaying fewer pixels of width, the
VDP also lowers its internal clock speed to match, and that limits how many sprites it can
process in the time available per line. Vertical resolution, on the other hand, doesn’t depend
onthishorizontalmode: thestandardis224visiblelines(V28mode),availableonbothNTSC
and PAL consoles. PAL consoles additionally support a V30 mode of 240 lines, exclusive to
that region; this chapter doesn’t go into it in depth, so it’s enough to know it exists and adds
16 extra vertical lines only on PAL systems.
2. How to activate it in SGDK
If a program doesn’t explicitly specify which mode to use, SGDK starts up in H40 by default.
Switching to H32 (256 pixels wide) takes a single line of code, placed anywhere before the
screen is drawn:
VDP_setScreenWidth256();
This function takes no parameters: it changes the horizontal resolution to 256 pixels the
moment it’s called. Symmetrically, there’s VDP_setScreenWidth320() to go back to (or stay
in) the 320-pixel H40 mode:
VDP_setScreenWidth320();
47

=== PAGE 54 ===
Neither function takes any arguments: each one directly sets its own width. This also means
a program can switch modes at different points during execution — for example, using H32
onatitlescreenandH40duringgameplay—aslongasthecorrespondingcallismadebefore
each screen is displayed.
3. The visual result: a speed effect that isn’t really one
Ifthesameprojectiscompiledinbothmodes—say,awidelevelmapthatscrollsautomatically
at a rate of one pixel per frame, using MAP_scrollTo() as covered in the previous chapter —
and the two results are run side by side, the width difference is obvious: one window shows
320 pixels and the other 256. What’s most striking, however, isn’t the width itself, but that
themapinH32givestheimpressionofscrollingfaster thantheoneinH40,eventhoughthe
scrolling code is exactly the same in both cases.
Figure 11: The same map in H40 and H32, a few seconds after the scroll starts
TheH32window(right)appearstohaveadvancedfurtherthantheH40one(left),eventhough
both scroll at the same rate of one pixel per frame.
That sense of different speed is a perceptual effect, not an actual difference in speed: since
the H32 screen has fewer pixels of width to cross, the same number of pixels scrolled per
second represents a larger fraction of that screen’s total width, which is why it’s perceived
as faster movement. It’s worth keeping this in mind when tuning a game’s scroll speed: a
value that feels right in H40 may feel too fast if the same project is switched to H32 without
revisiting that constant.
4. Why choose H32: examples from the industry
Although most Mega Drive games use H40, a fair number of commercial titles choose H32
undervariouscircumstances. AcommunityresearcherknownasFirebrandXcompiled,years
48

=== PAGE 55 ===
ago, an extensive and fairly well-cited list of games that use the 256×224 mode during dif-
ferentpartsofthegame(includingbothtitlescreensandgameplayitself),andreviewingthe
patternsinthatlisthelpsclarifywhatcriteriamightcomeintoplaywhenmakingthisdecision
in a project of your own.
A common pattern is low-resolution title screens followed by a game that runs in H40, as
happens in Golden Axe. A reasonable explanation is that it reduces the number of unique
tilesneededtofillthetitlescreen,andthereforetheROMspacethosetilestakeup;thisisn’t
adetailconfirmedbyitsoriginaldevelopers,soitshouldbetakenasaplausibleguessrather
than a verified fact.
Ports are another common case: games that already ran at 256 pixels wide on their original
system, such as several Konami titles (Sunset Riders, Lethal Enforcers) or EA Sports sports
games (the NHL series), use H32 to avoid having to redesign the art at a resolution different
from that of the source system. But not every case is a conversion: Shining Force 1 and
2, both originally developed by Sega for the Mega Drive, also opt for H32, possibly to save
space given the game’s numerous character portraits. As with Golden Axe, there’s no direct
confirmation from the developers about this particular decision either.
5. H32 to reduce CPU load: software-rendered 3D engines
AnotherreasontochooseH32showsupingamesthatrenderpseudo-3Dgraphicsinsoftware
insteadofrelyingonthehardware’stilesystem: inthosecases,theentireimageiscomputed
pixelbypixelontheCPU(oronanadditionalcoprocessor,suchastheSVPchipinVirtuaRac-
ing). With fewer pixels of width to compute, H32 mode can significantly ease that rendering
load.
Noteverygamewithanambitiouspseudo-3DengineresortstoH32,though: ZeroTolerance,
with an engine of this kind that was fairly demanding for its time, uses H40 and instead
shrinksthegameviewportitself,leavingtherestofthescreenoccupiedbytheweaponpanel
and character portrait, in order to keep the frame rate up without sacrificing the system’s
full resolution. This is an option worth considering when trying to ease the load of expensive
rendering without dropping out of H40: reduce the effective computation area and leave the
rest of the screen for the HUD.
6. H40 for more simultaneous sprites
Thedecisioncanalsogotheotherway,prioritizingH40overH32evenwhenportingcontent
fromanothersystem. InfanprojectsthataimtoadaptgamesfromotherconsolestotheMega
Drive, this dilemma comes up often; in an unofficial conversion of Castlevania: Symphony of
the Night (originally from PlayStation, whose resolution doesn’t exactly match either of the
Mega Drive’s two modes), the standard H40 mode was chosen instead of trying to replicate
the original resolution. The usual reasons for such a choice are, on one hand, being able to
showmoresimultaneousspritesonscreen,andontheother,anaestheticpreferenceforhow
the final result looks at that resolution.
When working with art originally designed for a higher-resolution console, H40 also has an
added advantage when displaying the result on a widescreen display (on an emulator or a
widescreen CRT television): when the final image is stretched to fill that width, the result
comes closer to the look of the original game than if it were based on an image generated in
H32 mode.
49

=== PAGE 56 ===
7. The challenge of porting from other consoles
Choosing a resolution gets even trickier when the source system doesn’t match either of the
Mega Drive’s two modes. The Game Boy Advance, for example, has a resolution of 240×160
pixels,quitedifferentfromtheMegaDrive’sonbothaxes. Therearefanprojectsthatexplore
exactly this scenario, such as a technical demo of Aria of Sorrow (originally from Game Boy
Advance) running on the Mega Drive.
The difference in vertical resolution tends to be the most visible problem in this kind of con-
version: the Game Boy Advance’s original 160 pixels of height are considerably smaller than
the Mega Drive’s 224 lines in V28 mode, which forces a choice between showing black bars
above and below, stretching the image, or redesigning the level outright to make use of the
extraverticalspace(themostlabor-intensiveofthethreeoptions,butalsotheonethattends
to give the best results). On top of that resolution difference, there’s also the need to adapt
the original color palette to the Mega Drive’s limit of colors per palette.
8. Why stretching sprites or levels is a bad idea
Stretching the image to compensate for a resolution difference is rarely a good idea. When
a sprite is stretched vertically without first correcting the horizontal proportion, the result
looks distorted and no longer aligns with the 8×8 pixel tile grid that all of the Mega Drive’s
hardware works on.
Figure 12: The same sprite, stretched vertically
Stretching distorts the art and throws it out of alignment with the 8×8 pixel tile grid.
Thatmisalignmentwiththetilegridisthemoreseriousproblem,beyondthepurelyaesthetic
one: the same 8×8 grid is used both to load graphics into VRAM and to calculate collisions
at the map level, so once the art stops matching it, both the VRAM loading and the level and
collision design become considerably harder to get right. In cases like Aria of Sorrow, it’s
50

=== PAGE 57 ===
usually more practical to redesign a level on a case-by-case basis or add extra tiles than to
accept that kind of distortion.
Review exercises
1. Explain the difference between H40 and H32 modes in terms of horizontal resolution
and sprite limits per frame and per line.
2. What line of code needs to be added to switch from H40 to H32, and what happens if a
program doesn’t call either of the two resolution-switching functions?
3. Inaside-by-sidecomparisonofthesamescrollingmap,theH32versionappearstomove
fasterthantheH40oneeventhoughbothusethesamescrollingcode. Explainwhythis
happens.
4. Name at least two distinct reasons why a commercial game might choose H32 mode
instead of H40.
5. Explain why stretching a sprite or a level to fit a different resolution tends to cause
problems beyond the purely aesthetic.
51

=== PAGE 58 ===
Chapter 11 — Large Level Maps
with MAP_create
Chapter7introducedtheIMAGEresource: asinglegraphic,upto512×256pixels,loadedin
full onto one of the two background planes with VDP_drawImageEx(). That method is enough
for many screens, such as a menu, a static background, or a title screen, but not for a large
platformer level, in the style of a zone from Sonic the Hedgehog, which extends well beyond
those dimensions. This chapter presents the solution SGDK offers for that case: splitting the
map into two separate resources, a TILESET with the unique tiles that make it up and a MAP
with the arrangement of those tiles across the whole level, and scrolling the visible portion
of a map that, as a whole, is much larger than the screen.
The example used is a simplified version of the Green Hill Zone from Sonic the Hedgehog,
reducedto16colorstorespectthelimitofaMegaDrivepalette(theoriginalusesmorethan
one palette in the foreground, a resource revisited in Chapter 14, dedicated to combining
several palettes in the same background). Before writing any code, it’s worth taking a close
look at the tiles that make up that map: the checkered pattern of the ground, the repeated
foliageofthetrees,andmuchofthelandscapearebuiltfromveryfewdistincttiles,repeated
over and over. That repetition is precisely what makes it possible to represent such a large
map with a reasonable amount of memory.
The full Green Hill Zone map open in the editor: the checkered pattern of the ground and
much of the landscape are built by repeating very few distinct tiles.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have fresh in mind:
• Chapters 7 (“Displaying backgrounds: BG_A/BG_B and VDP_drawImageEx”) and 9
(“Scroll and parallax scrolling”): the idea of an 8×8-pixel tile, of background planes
(BG_A and BG_B), of PAL_setPalette() to load a palette into CRAM, and the technique
of scrolling a background by modifying a variable inside the main loop.
• The data types covered in Chapter 6, in particular u16, since they appear in several of
this chapter’s functions.
1. Two resources from a single file: TILESET and MAP
The first step is, as always, to copy the graphic file into the res folder and declare the corre-
sponding resources in resources.res. The first line declares a TILESET resource, which tells
rescomp to examine the image and extract from it the set of unique tiles that make it up:
TILESET our_tileset "large green hill map.png" BEST ALL
52

=== PAGE 59 ===
Figure 13: The full Green Hill Zone map in the editor
The first two parameters are already familiar from other graphic resources: the source file
andthecompressionlevel(BEST,whichletsrescompautomaticallychoosethemostconvenient
method). The last parameter, ALL, is specific to a TILESET: it tells rescomp to discard both
duplicate tiles and their mirrored variants when building the unique tile set. It’s the default
modeandthemostconvenientforamaplikethisone,sinceaplatformerleveltendstoreuse
the same ground, foliage, or sky tile many, many times, sometimes mirrored horizontally or
vertically to vary the landscape without drawing a new tile.
The second line declares the MAP resource itself, which describes which tile goes in each
position of the full map:
MAP our_level_map "large green hill map.png" our_tileset BEST 0
An important detail is that the MAP resource references the TILESET just declared by name
(our_tileset), since a map on its own is just a grid of indices: it needs an associated tileset
to know which tile corresponds to each index.
Both resources use the same image file as their source, and that’s neither a mistake nor a
coincidence. rescomp scans that single image from left to right and top to bottom, identifies
each8×8-pixeltile,andbuildstheTILESETbyaddingonlythetilesithasn’tseenyet(thanksto
theALLmode,bothanexactrepeatandamirroredversionofatilealreadyseenarerecognized
and discarded). The MAP, on the other hand, preserves the complete layout of the level, but
expressed as a reference to each tile’s position within the already-reduced TILESET, instead
of repeating the full graphic of each tile everywhere it appears.
This separation is exactly what allows a visually enormous map, like the one in this chapter,
totakeuprelativelylittlespaceinROMandVRAM:repeatedinformationisstoredonlyonce,
and the map only records “tile number 12, mirrored, goes here” instead of repeating the full
graphic of tile 12 every time it appears.
53

=== PAGE 60 ===
2. Loading the tileset into VRAM and creating the map
With the resources already compiled and #include "resources.h" added to main.c, two vari-
ables are needed before main(): an index indicating where in VRAM the map’s tiles will be
loaded, and a pointer to the map itself, analogous to the Sprite* pointer already used for
sprites.
For the index, SGDK provides a constant marking the first VRAM slot free for programmer-
defined tiles (the tiles before that point are reserved for SGDK’s internal use, such as the
default text font):
u16 ind = TILE_USER_INDEX;
Withindalreadydeclared,thefirststepinsidemain()istoloadtheTILESET’stilesintoVRAM
with VDP_loadTileSet(), giving it the tileset to load, the VRAM index to start loading it at,
andthetransfermethod(DMA,thesamedirectmemoryaccessalreadyusedtoloadsprites):
VDP_loadTileSet(&our_tileset, ind, DMA);
With the tiles already in VRAM, the next step is to create the map structure itself with
MAP_create(), which needs three pieces of data: the MAP resource defined in resources.res,
the background plane where it will be displayed (BG_A or BG_B), and the base attributes with
which its tiles will be drawn:
Map* level_1_map;
level_1_map = MAP_create(&our_level_map, BG_B,
TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind));
That third argument is built with TILE_ATTR_FULL(pal, prio, flipV, flipH, index), the
same macro already used to combine palette, priority, flips, and VRAM index into a single
value, only here it’s applied to an entire map instead of a single sprite. The exact signature
of MAP_create() is:
Map* MAP_create(const MapDefinition *mapDef, VDPPlane plane, u16 baseTile);
In this example, the map is displayed on BG_B instead of BG_A simply because the chapter
workswithasingleplaneanddoesn’tneedtousebothatonceyet;it’sapracticaldecisionfor
thisspecificexample,notarestrictionofSGDK.Inarealgame,aplatformermaplikethisone
would normally go on the foreground plane (BG_A), reserving BG_B for a distant background
with parallax, like the one seen in Chapter 9. PAL0 is used because the map was prepared to
fill the full 16 colors of a single palette, and no flip or special priority is applied (the three
FALSE parameters), closing the call with the ind index already used when loading the tileset,
so the map knows where, within VRAM, the tiles it references are located.
3. A separate PALETTE resource
One last step remains before compiling: loading the map’s colors into the PAL0 hardware
palette,alreadyindicatedinMAP_create(). Inpreviouschapters,anIMAGEorSPRITEresource
includes a pointer to its own palette as part of its structure (image.palette->data), which
allows the colors to be extracted directly from the same already-loaded graphic resource,
without declaring anything additional.
A MAP, however, doesn’t work the same way: its structure includes no palette field of its own,
so there’s never an our_level_map.palette to fall back on. Trying to write something like
54

=== PAGE 61 ===
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, our_level_map.palette->data, DMA);,copyingthepatternusedwith
an IMAGE, doesn’t compile, because that field simply doesn’t exist in the Map structure.
A MAPresourcedescribesonlythelevel’stilelayout;itdoesn’tcarryitsownpalette.
The colors have to be obtained from elsewhere.
The solution is to declare an independent PALETTE resource in resources.res, telling it to
extract the colors from that same image file already used for the tileset and the map. A
PALETTE resource is, in itself, very simple: a name and a source file, nothing more.
PALETTE our_palette "large green hill map.png"
With this resource already compiled, loading the palette uses the .data field of the new
PALETTE resource, instead of the .palette->data chain that isn’t available for a map:
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, our_palette.data, DMA);
Withallthreepiecesnowinplace(tilesetloadedintoVRAM,mapcreatedonBG_B,andpalette
loaded into PAL0), the program should now compile without errors.
4. The first result: an entirely sky-blue screen
Compiling and running at this point, however, the result isn’t the expected Green Hill Zone
landscape, but an entirely sky-blue screen, with no landscape element visible at all.
There’s no error in the code: the map loaded and is being displayed correctly, it’s just that
MAP_create()startsshowingthemapfromexactlyitstop-leftcorner,coordinate(0,0). Since
the full map is much taller than the screen’s 224-pixel vertical resolution (see Chapter 10 on
the H40 and H32 resolution modes), that top-left corner corresponds solely to the sky, well
above where the ground, trees, and the rest of the recognizable landscape begin. The sky-
blue screen is, in that sense, the correct result of displaying exactly that portion of the map:
it simply isn’t the portion of interest to show first.
5. Finding where to scroll the map, and MAP_scrollTo()
To display a more useful portion of the map, it needs to be scrolled vertically, and to know
by how much, it helps to go back to the original image file in a pixel-art editor and locate,
with the cursor, the Y coordinate where the recognizable landscape begins (just above the
treeline,forinstance). Inthisparticularmap,thatcoordinateturnsouttobe768pixelsfrom
the top. That figure isn’t universal in any way: it’s specific to this particular file, an artistic
decisionaboutwherethelandscapewasdrawnwithinthefullimage. Anyothermaprequires
repeating the same visual-inspection process to find its own starting coordinate.
With that coordinate already identified, MAP_scrollTo() takes care of scrolling the map. The
function needs the map to scroll and the destination X and Y coordinates; in a first attempt,
withnohorizontalscrollingyet,it’senoughtoscrollverticallytothecoordinatealreadyfound:
MAP_scrollTo(level_1_map, 0, 768);
Compiling again with this adjustment, the sky-blue screen gives way to the expected land-
scape: the trees, the flowers, the ground, and Green Hill Zone’s characteristic checkered
pattern, exactly as they appear in the original file, with no sign of tile corruption or visual
artifacts.
55

=== PAGE 62 ===
6. Continuous scrolling: reusing the parallax scrolling
idea
Withthemapnowshowingthecorrectportion,it’snaturaltoextendtheexamplesoitscrolls
continuously to the right, reusing exactly the same idea already explained in Chapter 9: re-
placingthefixedXcoordinatevaluewithavariable,andincrementingitoneverypassthrough
the main loop.
The variable is declared alongside the rest of the global variables, before main():
int x = 0;
AndthecalltoMAP_scrollTo()movesinsidewhile (TRUE),sinceitnowdependsonavariable
thatchangesovertimeanditmakesnosensetocallitonlyonce,followedbyincrementingx
on every pass:
while (TRUE)
{
MAP_scrollTo(level_1_map, x, 768);
x += 1;
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
Theresult is anautomatic, continuous scroll tothe right, traversing theentire map fromend
to end with no player input at all. The landscape looks the same as in the original file, with
no artifacts, only now in constant motion.
Thisautomaticscrollingismerelyademonstrationdevice,nottheusualwaytodisplayalevel
ofthiskindinafinishedgame. Aplatformerinsteadneedsacamerathatfollowstheplayable
character’s position, scrolling the map according to where the player is moving instead of
doing so automatically and independently. Building that camera logic is left for Chapter 24;
fornow,it’senoughtounderstandhowamaplargerthanthescreenisassembledandscrolled,
which is the foundation that camera will build on.
Review exercises
1. Explainwhythischapterdeclarestworesources(TILESETandMAP)fromthesameimage
file, instead of using a single IMAGE resource as in Chapter 7.
2. What does the ALL optimization parameter do when declaring a TILESET resource, and
why is it the most convenient choice for a map like the one in this chapter?
3. AteammatetriestowritePAL_setPalette(PAL0, our_level_map.palette->data, DMA);,
copying the pattern used with an IMAGE in an earlier chapter, and the code doesn’t com-
pile because that field doesn’t exist. Explain why this happens and what alternative
should be used instead.
4. Whencompilingforthefirsttime,thescreenshowsupentirelysky-blueinsteadoftheex-
pectedlandscape, withnoerrormessage. Explainwhythishappensandwhichfunction
fixes the problem.
5. Describe, in general terms, what would need to change in this chapter’s code so that,
instead of scrolling automatically, the map would follow the position of a playable char-
acter controlled with the D-pad.
56

=== PAGE 63 ===
Chapter 12 — Level Maps with
Tiled and TMX Files
Designing levels with an external graphical tool instead of drawing the map by hand, and
bringing that design into the SGDK project
The previous chapter showed how to declare the TILESET, PALETTE, and MAP resources sepa-
rately,loadthemwithVDP_loadTileSet,andusethemtobuildaMapstructureviaMAP_create,
capable of scrolling with MAP_scrollTo. That workflow assumes the map already exists in
some format rescomp knows how to read, but it says nothing about how that map is designed
inthefirstplace. Drawinganentireleveltilebytile,byhand,ontopofanimageordirectlyas
alistofnumbers, isworkablefora smallscreen, but itquicklybecomesimpracticalonce the
level grows to several screens wide, has several overlapping layers (background, platforms,
decoration), or the design needs to be iterated on many times during development.
This is exactly what dedicated map editors are for. This chapter covers the workflow with
Tiled,ageneral-purposeexternaleditorfortile-based2Dgames,anditsexportformat,TMX.
ThenextchapterpresentsanalternativebuiltspecificallyforSGDK,the16Tiletool,inmore
depth; the goal here is to understand the Tiled workflow well enough to use it comfortably,
and to be able to compare it critically once you’ve read chapter 13.
Prerequisites
• Have SGDK 2.11 installed and a working base project, as explained in chapter 3.
• Know the difference between the TILESET, PALETTE, and MAP resources, and the use of
MAP_create/MAP_scrollTo covered in chapter 11.
• A tileset of your own in image format (PNG), respecting the same palette restrictions
already covered in previous chapters: at most 16 colors per palette and 8×8-pixel tiles,
the smallest unit the VDP can handle.
1. What a tileset is and why an external tool helps
Asmentionedinchapter11,generatingalargebackgroundbydrawingitentirelyasasingle
imagecaneatupanunreasonableamountofROM.Thealternativeisatileset: asmallsetof
8×8-pixelgraphicpiecesthatarecombinedandrepeatedtobuildmapsmuchlargerthanthe
sum of their parts. A handful of “grass,” “dirt,” and “rock” tiles is enough to build an entire
level, as long as there’s also a map: the list of which tile goes in each position of the grid.
Drawingthatlistbyhand—amatrixofnumbers,eachonetheindexofatilewithinthetileset
— is tedious and error-prone even for a modest level. A map-editing tool solves exactly that
problem: it presents the tileset as a palette of brushes and lets you “paint” the map visually,
tile by tile, instead of writing numeric indices by hand.
57

=== PAGE 64 ===
2. Tiled (mapeditor.org)
Tiledisanopen-source,cross-platform(Windows,Linux,andmacOS)tilemapeditorreleased
under the GPL license, available at mapeditor.org. It’s not a Mega Drive– or SGDK–specific
tool: it’s a generic editor used in 2D game development in general, which brings a concrete
advantage — abundant documentation and a community of its own, independent of this man-
ual—andanequallyconcretelimitation: itknowsnothingabouttheMegaDrive’sparticular
hardware restrictions (16-color palettes, a maximum of four palettes, 8×8 tiles), so those re-
strictions remain the responsibility of whoever designs the source tileset, before bringing it
into Tiled.
The typical workflow within Tiled is as follows:
1. Createanewmap,specifyingthegridsizeintilesandthesizeofeachtileinpixels(8×8,
so that each cell of the map corresponds to exactly one VDP tile).
2. Import, as a tileset, the image already prepared with the level’s graphic pieces.
3. Create one or more tile-map–type layers, and paint on each one using the tileset as a
palette of brushes. It’s common to use one layer for the walkable background and a
separateoneforelementsthatbelongonadifferentplane(forexample,decorationthat
appears in front of the sprites), since on the Mega Drive each Tiled layer can later be
mapped to a different hardware plane (BG_A or BG_B).
4. Save the finished map, exporting it in TMX format (an XML format native to Tiled) or,
alternatively, in JSON. SGDK, through rescomp, works with the TMX format.
Tiled’s interface while editing a map typically shows the layers panel on the right — with the
list of layers created so far and controls to show or hide them — and, at the bottom, the tile
palette of the imported tileset, ready for picking the tile to paint onto the map grid.
When saving the tile layer, it’s worth checking that the layer’s encoding format is
CSV (a list of comma-separated numbers) rather than a compressed binary encod-
ing. With layers in CSV, the resulting TMX file is readable plain text, which also
acts as a safety net: if something goes wrong during automatic import, it’s always
possible to open the TMX with a text editor and check at a glance what numbers
were saved.
3. Importing the TMX into the project with rescomp
SinceSGDKversion1.80,rescomp—theresourcecompilerthatalreadyconvertsimagesand
palettesinpreviouschapters—canreadaTMXfileexportedbyTileddirectly,withnomanual
intermediate step. The corresponding resource in the resources.res file generally has the
form:
TILEMAP resource_name "level1.tmx" [options]
This resource generates, in resources.h/resources.c, a structure of type TileMap (different
fromtheMapstructurethatMAP_createbuilds)whichessentiallycontainsthewidthandheight
ofthemapintilesandthelistoftileindicesfromoneofitslayers,exactlyastheyweresaved
in the TMX’s <data> tag. That structure can be used in two ways, depending on what the
game needs:
• Combined with what was already covered in chapter 11: by also separately
declaring the TILESET and PALETTE resources corresponding to the same tileset used in
Tiled, and using MAP_create to build the final Map structure that is then scrolled with
MAP_scrollTo. This is the most direct path when the goal is a large level with scrolling
— exactly the same scenario that motivated the previous chapter.
58

=== PAGE 65 ===
• More directly, when the map is small or static and the scrolling machinery of the MAP
unit isn’t needed: by reading the index list from the TileMap structure and dumping it,
tilebytile,ontoaplanealreadysetupwiththecorrespondingtilesetloadedintoVRAM.
The .tmx file itself doesn’t need to be copied by hand anywhere else: it’s enough to leave it
insidetheproject’sresourcesfolder(alongsidetheimagesandotherfilesalreadyreferenced
by resources.res) and declare the TILEMAP resource line pointing to that file, the same way
it’s done with IMAGE, TILESET, or PALETTE.
The manual technique, prior to direct import
Before rescomp couldread aTMX directly, theonly way tobring amap designed inTiled into
an SGDK project was a more artisanal technique. Today it’s unnecessary in the normal case,
but it’s worth knowing: it helps explain what the TILEMAP resource does behind the scenes,
and it’s useful for specific debugging cases.
1. Save the map in Tiled with the tile layer encoded as CSV, and confirm that each tile is
8×8 pixels.
2. Opentheresulting.tmxfilewithaplaintexteditor. BeingXML,insidethe<data>tagof
each layer appears the full list of the map’s tile indices, comma-separated, in the same
order the grid is traversed (row by row).
3. Copythatlistofnumbersandpasteitintoanarrayinacustomheaderfile(forexample,
map.h, inside the project’s inc folder).
4. Include that map.h from the source code, declare the tileset as a resource the usual way
(TILESETandPALETTEinthe.resfile),loaditwithVDP_loadTileSetandPAL_setPalette,
andfinallytraversethescreendrawingeachtilefromthecopiedarray,onebyone,using
the VDP’s low-level functions.
This is, in essence, the same result the TILEMAP resource achieves today in a single step, but
donebyhandandwithoutthevalidationorcompressionthatrescompapplies. Understanding
this manual path helps clarify what the <data> tag of a TMX actually contains, and what the
automatic import is doing behind the scenes.
4. A complete example workflow
A level designed in Tiled and brought into an SGDK 2.11 project follows these steps, end to
end:
1. Prepare the tileset as a PNG image, respecting the limit of 16 colors per palette.
2. Design the map in Tiled: create the grid with 8×8-pixel tiles, import the tileset, paint
the level’s layer (or layers), and save the layer in CSV format.
3. Export the file as .tmx and copy it into the project’s resources folder.
4. Declare the resource in resources.res:
TILESET tileset_level1 "tileset.png" NONE
PALETTE palette_level1 "tileset.png"
TILEMAP map_level1 "level1.tmx"
5. Inthecode,loadthetilesetandpalettewiththefunctionsalreadycoveredinchapter11
(VDP_loadTileSet, PAL_setPalette), and use the data from map_level1 to build the Map
structurewithMAP_create,ortodrawthemapdirectlyiftheleveldoesn’tneedscrolling.
6. If the level uses scrolling, scroll it with MAP_scrollTo exactly as with a map declared
without going through Tiled.
59

=== PAGE 66 ===
The important point is that, regardless of the map’s origin — drawn tile by tile in a custom
array, as in chapter 11, or visually designed in Tiled and brought in as TMX — the rest of
the loading and scrolling code doesn’t change: MAP_create and MAP_scrollTo work the same
regardless of where the map data comes from. Tiled solves exclusively the problem of de-
signing the level, not the problem of how the Mega Drive ultimately displays it on screen.
5. Tiled versus 16Tile
Chapter 13 introduces 16Tile, a tool built specifically for the SGDK workflow, with more
direct integration with the Mega Drive’s own restrictions (palettes, unique-tile limits, export
tailored to this particular hardware). Without getting into how it works just yet, it’s worth
outlining how the two compare as alternatives:
• Tiled is a generic tool, far more widely used and documented outside the Mega Drive
scene, with active support and features useful for any tile-based game (multiple layers,
objects,customproperties). Inexchange,itknowsnothingaboutthishardware’spartic-
ulars: you have to manually account for palette and unique-tile-count restrictions when
preparing the source tileset.
• 16Tile,beingbuiltspecificallyforSGDK,cantailoritsexporttothoserestrictionsmore
directly, at the cost of being a niche tool, with a community and documentation much
smaller than Tiled’s.
Neither one fully replaces the other: they’re two valid paths to solving the same problem,
and the choice depends largely on how comfortable each person is with a general-purpose
interfaceversusonebuilttomeasure. Chapter13returnstothistopicwiththedetailneeded
to decide with better judgment.
Review exercises
1. WhatspecificproblemdoesatoollikeTiledsolvethatdrawingthemapasasinglelarge
image doesn’t?
2. Why is it worth saving the tile layer in CSV format when exporting a map from Tiled for
an SGDK project, instead of leaving the default binary encoding?
3. Explain in your own words the difference between the TileMap structure generated by
the TILEMAP resource and the Map structure generated by MAP_create.
4. What manual steps does the TILEMAP resource in rescomp replace, in practice, starting
from SGDK 1.80?
5. If two layers of the same Tiled map represent, one, the walkable terrain, and the other,
decoration that should appear in front of the characters, how would that separation
translate when bringing the map to the Mega Drive?
60

=== PAGE 67 ===
Chapter 13 — Creating Maps with
16Tile
A tool built specifically for SGDK: VDP palette and priority assigned tile by tile, rather than
uniformly across the whole background
The previous chapter showed how to design a level map in Tiled, a generic tile map editor,
and bring it into an SGDK project through the TILEMAP resource from rescomp. Before that,
we had already seen the even more basic possibility of building a background with a conven-
tional image editor —a plain pixel canvas, with no knowledge whatsoever of the console’s
hardware—andimportingtheresultasanIMAGEorMAPresource. Bothapproacheswork,and
both share the same limitation: the entire image ends up tied to a single color palette and a
single VDP priority value for the whole background, with no per-tile distinction.
Thischapterintroduces16Tile,afreeexternaltoolcreatedspecificallyforMegaDrivedevel-
opment with SGDK, distributed by its author under the username Allone-Works on itch.io.
Unlike Tiled, 16Tile is not a general-purpose map editor: it comes with built-in knowledge
of the VDP’s constraints and capabilities, and it lets you assign palette and priority indepen-
dently to each individual tile of a map, while also exporting the files SGDK needs directly.
Together with Tiled from chapter 12, it is one of the two usual alternatives for solving the
same level-design problem: one generic and well documented, the other purpose-built for
this particular hardware.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Completed chapter 11 (“Large level maps with MAP_create”), in particular the TILESET
and MAP resources, and the MAP_create() function.
• A clear understanding of the concept of a palette for a Mega Drive graphics resource
(PAL0–PAL3, 16 colors each, with the first color of any palette other than PAL0 always
transparent).
• Animageeditorcapableofworkingwithindexedpalettes—suchasAseprite,coveredin
chapter 8— to prepare the source tileset before importing it into 16Tile.
1. The Mega Drive palette: why not just any RGB value will
do
The Mega Drive palette works in 9-bit RGB: 3 bits for each of the three channels (red, green,
and blue). With 3 bits it’s possible to represent 8 distinct combinations of zeros and ones, so
each channel supports 8 possible tones, and combining all three channels (8 × 8 × 8) yields
61

=== PAGE 68 ===
a total of 512 distinct colors available. For comparison, other machines from the same era
—the 32X and the Super Nintendo— use 15-bit RGB: 5 bits per channel, 32 possible tones
per channel, and 32 × 32 × 32 = 32,768 colors in total, sixty-four times more than the Mega
Drive.
Thepracticalproblemisthataconventionalimageeditordoesn’tworkwith8tonesperchan-
nel, but with 256 (0 to 255, the standard 8 bits per channel). For a color defined in an image
editor to translate faithfully into one of the 8 actual tones the Mega Drive can reproduce, its
red, green, and blue values must fall exactly on the 8 values the hardware supports between
0 and 255; any intermediate value gets rounded to the nearest tone when displayed on real
hardwareorinanaccurateemulator,whichcansubtlyalterthecolorsofatilesetthatwasn’t
prepared with those exact values in mind.
2. A practical reference for verifying valid colors
The question that remains open is exactly which 8 values per channel, between 0 and 255,
faithfullyreproducetheMegaDrive’shardware. Morethanonereferencetablecirculatesin
the homebrew development community for this console for that purpose: some advance in
approximate steps of 36 (0, 36, 72, 108, 144, 180, 216, 255), others follow a more irregular
curve intended to approximate real measurements of the VDP’s video output (0, 52, 87, 116,
144,172,206,255),andothersuseregularstepsof32(0,32,64,96,128,160,192,224,255,
with a small adjustment to the last value). There is no publicly available official documenta-
tionfromSegaconfirmingwhichofthesetablesmostaccuratelyreflectsthehardware’sreal
behavior;it’sbesttotreatanyofthemasapracticalcommunityconvention,usefulforcheck-
ing at a glance whether a color falls within valid tones, rather than as an officially verified
fact.
For a background meant to be displayed through a generic IMAGE resource, any of these ref-
erences works reasonably well. When working specifically with 16Tile, however, it’s best
to adopt the steps-of-32 table, since that’s the one the tool itself expects and with which it
produces the most consistent results: the rest of this chapter assumes that convention.
3. Getting 16Tile
16Tile is a free tool, distributed on itch.io under the username Allone-Works, that requires
no installation: just download the compressed file, unzip it into any folder, and run the .exe
directly. It’s best to always use the most recent version available on the project’s page.
Theitch.iopageitselfconfirmsthatthetoolwasdesignedspecificallytoworkalongsideSGDK,
and it includes a sample project with the source code needed to import its resources.
The16Tileinterfacejustafteropening,withtheLayerandTilesetpanelsontherightandthe
main canvas still empty.
4. Preparing the source tileset
Before opening 16Tile you need a tileset already prepared in a conventional image editor.
Two rules matter when preparing it:
1. The image’s height must always be a multiple of 8, the base size of a Mega Drive tile.
2. It’s a good idea to reserve the first 16×16 tile as blank, using the background color as
its only color, and the second 16×16 tile for drawing the full palette in order, one pixel
per color. This ensures that, when the image is imported into 16Tile, the order of the
62

=== PAGE 69 ===
Figure 14: 16Tile interface freshly opened
palette indices is preserved exactly as defined, without the tool reordering them on its
own.
5. First steps in 16Tile: project, layer, and tileset
The first step within 16Tile is to save the project (Save, at the top), giving it any name. Then,
intheright-handpanel,theLayer sectionletsyounamethebackgroundlayeryou’reaboutto
build. Once the layer has been created, you need to assign it a tileset: in the Tileset section
of the same panel, the + button creates a new tileset, and the arrow icon lets you load the
image prepared in the previous step.
If the source tileset comes from graphics extracted with an emulator —a common source for
experimenting— it’s common for the colors to look wrong the first time they’re loaded into
16Tile: the emulator may export the RGB values on its own scale, which doesn’t necessarily
matchthesteps-of-32scale. Thefixistogobacktotheimageeditor,manuallyadjusttheRGB
valuesofeachcolorsotheyfallonthosesteps,savethecorrectedimage,deletetheprevious
tileset within 16Tile, and load the corrected version instead.
6. Painting the map: tile size, pasting, and flipping
With the tileset already loaded correctly, the right-hand panel lets you choose the tile size
to paste onto the main map: 8×8, 16×16, or 32×32 pixels, depending on the level of detail
neededforthatparticulartileset. Paintingthemapconsistsofleft-clickingatileinthetileset
panel to select it, and then left-clicking on the main canvas to paste it; holding the button
downwhiledraggingthecursorletsyoupasteseveraltilesinarowinasinglemotion,without
repeating the process tile by tile.
63

=== PAGE 70 ===
Figure 15: First tiles pasted onto the canvas
Several tiles already pasted onto the main canvas, forming the first elements of the map.
Two keyboard shortcuts let you flip the selected tile before pasting it: the X key flips it hori-
zontally,andtheZkeyflipsitvertically;anindicatorintheright-handpanelconfirmswhether
flipping is active.
16Tile has no undo function whatsoever: there is no shortcut equivalent to Ctrl+Z
to revert a mistake. It’s best to save the project frequently and pay close attention
while painting, since any error has to be fixed by hand rather than undone with a
single command.
7. Exporting the finished map
Oncethemapisfinished,thelaststepwithinthetoolistosavetheprojectandusetheExport
button at the top. This generates three separate files —the palette, the tileset, and the tile
map itself— each as a separate PNG image, ready to be imported into SGDK.
8. Importing the exported resources into SGDK
With the three files already exported, the tileset and the map are copied directly into the res
folder of the SGDK project. There’s no need to use the palette exported separately: it can
be extracted from the map file itself, since the latter already contains all the necessary color
information. Inresources.resyouneedtodeclaretheTILESET,pointingtothetilesetfileyou
just copied, and the MAP, pointing to the map file; the PALETTE line, instead of pointing to the
separately exported palette file, also points to the map file:
TILESET tileset_village "background.png" NONE
PALETTE palette_village "background.png"
64

=== PAGE 71 ===
MAP village_map "background.png" tileset_village NONE
9. Updating the constants in main.c
Withtheresourcesalreadyinplace,afewadjustmentsareneededinmain.c. First,MAP_WIDTH
andMAP_HEIGHTmustbeupdatedtoreflecttheactualwidthandheightofthenewmap,values
that can be checked directly in 16Tile before exporting. Second, if the base project had its
horizontalresolutionsetto256pixels(H32mode,coveredinchapter10),it’sworthreviewing
whethertoswitchbackto320pixels(H40mode,theusualhorizontalresolution),bothinthe
HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION macro and in any related call involving screen width.
This same type of project —a large scrolling background— is also the foundation on which,
laterinthismanual(chapter24),a2Dcameraisadded;nothingshownheredependsonthat,
but it’s worth keeping in mind if you reuse the same base code later on.
10. The key change: replacing TILE_ATTR_FULL with the
tileset index
The most important change in this chapter happens in the call to MAP_create(). Up through
chapter11,thelastparameterofthatfunctionwasalwaysacalltoTILE_ATTR_FULL(palette,
priority, vertical_flip, horizontal_flip, index), manually specifying a single set of
attributes to be applied uniformly across the whole map:
MAP_create(&village_map, BG_B, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind));
A map exported from 16Tile, by contrast, already includes the palette, priority, and flip
information for each tile embedded directly within the map’s own PNG file, in a format
that rescomp recognizes automatically at compile time. This lets you replace the entire
TILE_ATTR_FULL(...) call with simply the tileset’s index variable (ind in this example), let-
ting the resource itself —rather than a single function call— determine each tile’s attributes
individually:
MAP_create(&village_map, BG_B, ind);
When you compile and run the result in an emulator, the map created in 16Tile appears on
screen as expected, with palette and priority already resolved tile by tile straight from the
resource itself.
11. Why use 16Tile instead of a generic image editor
For a simple map, building it directly with a generic image editor —as in previous chapters—
may even be faster. The reason to prefer 16Tile isn’t speed in a simple case, but three capa-
bilities that a generic image editor doesn’t offer, or offers only with much more difficulty:
1. Independent palette per tile. Instead of forcing a single palette for the whole back-
ground, each tile can use any of the active palettes. Since the Mega Drive can have up
to 4 palettes active simultaneously (with a combined total of 61 distinct colors visible
at once, discounting the transparent color of each palette beyond PAL0), this allows for
backgrounds far richer in color than what a single 16-color palette permits. Chapter 14
picks this technique back up in detail.
2. Independent VDP priority per tile. This allows for depth effects where the character
can pass in front of some parts of the landscape and behind others, a subject developed
in chapter 15.
65

=== PAGE 72 ===
3. Generating a collision array from the painted map itself, instead of having to define
it separately by hand, a technique revisited when covering level collision in chapter 40.
Review exercises
1. Explain the difference between the Mega Drive’s 9-bit RGB and the 15-bit RGB of the
32X or the Super Nintendo, and calculate how many total colors each supports.
2. WhyisitnecessaryfortheRGBvaluesofasourcetilesettomatchthetonesperchannel
that the Mega Drive can reproduce, rather than using any value between 0 and 255?
3. Explainwhatit’sfortoreservethefirsttileofatilesetasblankandthesecondonewith
the full palette drawn in order, before importing it into 16Tile.
4. WhatexactlychangesinthecalltoMAP_create()whenusingamapexportedfrom16Tile,
compared to a map created by hand or imported from Tiled, and why is that change
possible?
5. Compare16TilewithTiled(chapter12)intermsofthethreeadvancedcapabilitiesmen-
tioned in section 11: which of them are more straightforward in 16Tile, and why?
66

=== PAGE 73 ===
Chapter 14 — Multiple Palettes
on the Same Background with
16Tile
Overcoming the one-palette-per-background-layer limit, tile by tile
Chapter 13 introduced 16Tile as an alternative to a generic image editor for building Mega
Drive backgrounds, and mentioned in passing one of its advantages: the ability to assign the
paletteindependentlyforeachtileofthemap. Thischapterdevelopsthatideaindetail: how
toprepareatilesetthatcombinesgraphicsintendedformorethanonepalette,howtoimport
it into 16Tile together with the additional palette it needs, and how to assign each palette to
the corresponding tiles while painting the map.
Prerequisites
• Having completed Chapter 13 (“Creating maps with 16Tile”), in particular the
tool’s full workflow and the use of a simple tile index in MAP_create() instead of
TILE_ATTR_FULL(...).
• Remembering, from Chapter 2, that the Mega Drive supports 4 simultaneous hardware
palettes(PAL0–PAL3): PAL0has16usablecolors,andtheotherthreehave15each,since
thefirstcolorofanypaletteotherthanPAL0isalwaystransparent. Thisgivesacombined
total of 61 colors visible at once.
• KnowingPAL_setPalette(),coveredinChapter7,forloadingapaletteintoagivenhard-
ware register.
• Having an image editor capable of working with indexed palettes, to prepare and com-
bine the source tilesets.
1. The problem: a background with more colors than fit in
a single palette
The example for this chapter is the village background from Beyond Oasis, a 1994 Mega
Drive game, which uses a total of 29 distinct colors. Since any individual Mega Drive palette
supports at most 16 colors (or 15 usable ones if it isn’t PAL0), a 29-color background cannot
bedisplayedcorrectlywithasinglepalette: itsgraphicsneedtobesplitacrosstwodifferent
palettes, deciding which background elements use each one.
The original Beyond Oasis village background, with a total of 29 distinct colors.
67

=== PAGE 74 ===
Figure 16: The original Beyond Oasis village background, with 29 distinct colors
2. Preparing two independent tilesets, each with its own
palette
The first step is to create two separate tilesets, each limited to the colors of a single palette:
one for the elements that will use PAL0 and another for the ones that will use PAL1. For this
example there’s no need to split every single element of the original background between
the two palettes with pixel-perfect precision; it’s enough to put together a representative
selection for each one. It’s also not essential to convert the resulting palette to the 32-step
palette recommended for 16Tile: in this particular case, almost all the colors (except for a
couple of flowers) carry over just as well without that conversion, though it’s worth keeping
in mind as a general best practice.
The rules already familiar from Chapter 13 still apply unchanged: height and width that are
multiples of 8, indexed color mode, file saved as PNG, and the second 16×16 tile of each
tileset with its corresponding palette drawn in order, so that 16Tile can read it on import.
Adjusting the canvas size to make room to combine both tilesets into a single file.
3. Combining both tilesets into a single file, taking care
with copy order
16Tile imports a single tileset per layer, so the two tilesets prepared separately need to be
combinedintoonefilebeforecontinuing. Thesimplestapproach—copyingthePAL1tileset’s
elements directly onto the already-open PAL0 tileset — produces an unexpected result: the
colorsofthoseelementschangetosomethingotherthanexpected,becausetheimageeditor
reinterprets those pixels using the indices of the currently active palette (PAL0’s) instead of
preserving their original colors.
68

=== PAGE 75 ===
Figure 17: Adjusting the canvas size to combine both tilesets
Figure 18: PAL1 elements with incorrect colors when pasted onto PAL0
69

=== PAGE 76 ===
The elements copied from the PAL1 tileset (the tree and the fence) take on incorrect colors
when pasted directly onto the PAL0 tileset.
The solution is to reverse the order of the operation:
1. Paste the PAL0 palette into the PAL1 tileset itself, so that both momentarily share the
same active palette.
2. Only then copy the elements, now correctly converted, into the final tileset.
When combining tilesets intended for different palettes into a single file, it’s al-
ways best to first match the active palette of both and only then copy the graphics.
Copying the graphics before matching the palette is the most common cause of
an element changing color “for no apparent reason” when combined with another
tileset.
Doing it in this order, the color indices are preserved correctly and the elements keep their
original appearance when combined into the same file.
Figure 19: Elements combined correctly after matching the palette first
The same elements now combined correctly, after pasting the PAL0 palette into the PAL1
tileset before copying the graphics.
WiththecombinedtilesetalreadysavedasPNG—alsoremoving,alongtheway,anyleftover
fromthepalettereferencerowthat’snolongerneeded,sincethecombinedtilesetnowusesa
single shared palette row — the last preparation step is to export the PAL1 palette separately
as a .pal file, since 16Tile needs to load it independently later on.
70

=== PAGE 77 ===
4. Importing the combined tileset and the additional
palette into 16Tile
Inside 16Tile, the combined tileset is imported the same way already familiar from Chapter
13 (Tileset > + > arrow icon). The PAL0 palette is taken automatically from the colors of the
importedtilesetitself,butthePAL1palettemustbeloadedseparately: inthetop-rightcorner,
the icon corresponding to PAL1 lets you select the .pal file exported in the previous step.
Switching between PAL0 and PAL1 inside 16Tile should reproduce, for each half of the tileset,
a result equivalent to what the original tilesets looked like in the image editor. If either half
shows incorrect colors at this point, it’s worth reviewing the copy order from the previous
step before moving on.
Figure 20: Combined tileset imported into 16Tile with the palette selector
The combined tileset already imported into 16Tile, with the PAL0/PAL1/PAL2/PAL3 selector
visible at the bottom.
5. Painting the map with both palettes
With the tileset and both palettes already loaded, painting the map follows the same pro-
cedure already familiar from Chapter 13. It’s best to first paste the elements intended for
PAL0 (houses, path, grass) and then the ones intended for PAL1 (trees, fences, and a few addi-
tional decorative elements), without worrying yet about assigning them the correct palette:
in16Tile,everynewtileisautomaticallyassignedtoPAL0bydefault,regardlessofwhichhalf
of the combined tileset it came from.
The map with several houses already pasted using the PAL0 tileset.
71

=== PAGE 78 ===
Figure 21: Map with several houses pasted using the PAL0 tileset
6. Assigning the palette for each tile
Theleft-handpanelin16Tileincludesfourbuttonsnumbered0to3,oneforeachMegaDrive
palette. SinceeverynewtileisalreadyautomaticallyassignedtoPAL0,allthat’sneededisto
manually select PAL1 (or PAL2/PAL3, in a background that uses them) and then paint over the
tiles that should use that particular palette, the same way you’d paint normal tiles. A small
numeric indicator appears over each tile already marked, making it possible to check at a
glance which ones use each palette.
Tree tiles already marked with the “1” indicator, assigning them the PAL1 palette.
Transparency deserves attention when combining palettes this way: since the first color of
anypaletteotherthanPAL0isalwaystransparent,it’sworthdeliberatelychoosingwhichcolor
occupies that first slot in PAL1 (in this example, the same green as the grass, which already
occupies the first slot in PAL0). That way, wherever a PAL1 tile shows transparency, what
shows through underneath matches the expected background color instead of displaying an
unexpected one.
As an additional demonstration — not as part of the intended final result for a real back-
ground — it’s also possible to assign PAL1 to one of the houses, to visually check how much
its appearance changes when using a palette intended for a different kind of element.
A house with the PAL1 palette applied for demonstration purposes, showing a visually differ-
ent result from PAL0.
7. Exporting and integrating the result into SGDK
The export process is the same one already familiar from Chapter 13 (Save, then Export),
again generating the tileset, the map, and the palette. The difference from the previous
72

=== PAGE 79 ===
Figure 22: Tree tiles marked with the “1” indicator for PAL1
Figure 23: House with PAL1 applied for demonstration purposes
73

=== PAGE 80 ===
chapter shows up when integrating these files into the SGDK project: since two palettes
are now needed instead of one, resources.res needs two independent PALETTE lines, each
pointing to its own palette file — unlike Chapter 13, where a single PALETTE line could be
extracted directly from the map file:
TILESET village_tileset "village_tileset.png" NONE
PALETTE village_pal0 "village_pal0.pal"
PALETTE village_pal1 "village_pal1.pal"
MAP village_map "village_map.bin" village_tileset NONE
In main.c, correspondingly, two calls to PAL_setPalette() are needed: one for PAL0 with the
data from village_pal0, and another for PAL1 with the data from village_pal1.
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, village_pal0.palette->data, DMA);
PAL_setPalette(PAL1, village_pal1.palette->data, DMA);
When writing the second call by copying and pasting the first, be careful to check that two
values have been corrected, not just one: both the destination register (from PAL0 to PAL1)
and the source resource (from village_pal0 to village_pal1). It’s an easy mistake to make
when editing a copied line, and the result — if you forget to change the source resource, for
example—isthatbothcallsenduploadingthesamepaletteintodifferentregisters,without
the compiler flagging it as an error.
8. Compiling and verifying the result
With both palettes now loaded, the tileset and map updated, and the MAP_WIDTH/MAP_HEIGHT
constantsadjustedtothedimensionsofthenewmap(different,again,fromthoseinChapter
13), compiling and running the result lets you directly compare, within the same emulator, a
house with PAL0 next to another with PAL1 applied for demonstration purposes.
Figure 24: Compiled result: a house with PAL0 next to another with PAL1
74

=== PAGE 81 ===
The compiled result, with a house with PAL0 (original colors) next to another with PAL1 ap-
plied for demonstration purposes (altered colors).
It’scommon,whencomparingthecompiledresultagainstthemapasitappearsintheeditor,
to find some isolated discrepancy: for example, a tree tile that keeps PAL0’s colors instead of
the expected PAL1 ones. The most frequent cause of this kind of discrepancy is simply a tile
that was left unmarked while painting the map in 16Tile: since this is a manual, tile-by-tile
assignment, it’s easy for one to get overlooked, especially in areas with many similar tiles
next to each other (like a tree’s foliage).
The method for diagnosing this kind of error is straightforward: go back to 16Tile and check
thenumericpaletteindicatorsintheareaofthemapwherethediscrepancyappears,visually
comparing that area against the compiled result in the emulator. Generally it’s enough to
locate the tile in question, confirm that its indicator shows “0” instead of “1,” and paint over
itagainwiththecorrectpalettealreadyselected. It’sworthmakingthiscomparisonbetween
the editor and the compiled ROM a routine review step whenever working with more than
one palette on the same background: a mis-assigned tile doesn’t produce any compilation
error, it simply looks wrong, and can only be caught by looking at the result.
Figure 25: Checking in 16Tile for a tree tile not assigned to PAL1
Checking in 16Tile, comparing the map against the emulator, to find which tree tile was left
unassigned to PAL1.
9. How to distribute the 4 palettes across a full game
Beyond this specific two-palette example, it’s worth thinking about how to distribute the
4 available palettes across a complete game. A common distribution — arising from prac-
tice rather than from any rule of the hardware or of SGDK — is to use PAL0 for the farthest
background, a combination of PAL0 and PAL1 for the playable foreground, PAL2 for the main
75

=== PAGE 82 ===
character (along with sub-weapons or other elements that can share that same palette, and
occasionally some enemy), and reserve PAL3 specifically for enemies.
Thisparticulardistributionisn’tafixedrule: it’sjustonepracticalconventionamongseveral
possible ones. How to distribute palettes in any given project is ultimately up to each devel-
oper’s judgment, depending on how many distinct elements need to be shown on screen at
once and how much it makes sense to share a single palette among them.
Review exercises
1. Explain why a 29-color background cannot be displayed correctly using a single Mega
Drive palette, and how many palettes at minimum would be needed to display it in full.
2. When combining two tilesets from different palettes into a single file, why does copying
the graphics directly produce incorrect colors, and in what order must the operation be
done to avoid that problem?
3. Where does 16Tile take the PAL0 palette from when importing a tileset, and where must
any additional palette such as PAL1 be taken from?
4. Explainwhyit’sagoodideatochoosethesamecolorforthefirstslotof PAL0andof PAL1
when building a background with more than one palette.
5. Atileinabackgroundwithtwopalettesshowsupwiththewrongcolorsintheemulator,
buttheprojectcompileswithoutanyerrors. Whatisthemostlikelycause,andhowisit
diagnosed within 16Tile?
76

=== PAGE 83 ===
Chapter 15 — Depth via Tile
Priority
Chapters 13 and 14 showed how to use 16Tile to build a level map and how to split its tiles
acrossseveralpalettes. Thischapterclosesoutthetrilogybycoveringtheothermajorbenefit
ofassigningattributestilebytile: VDPpriorityappliedselectivelywithinasingleplane,rather
thantoanentireplaneasintheexamplefromChapter7. Withthistechnique, abackground
canbeshowninfrontofthespritesinsomeareasandbehindtheminotherswithinthesame
layer, giving the impression that a character is walking in the middle of the scenery rather
than simply in front of it.
AclassicexampleofthiseffectisthesceneinWorldofIllusionStarringMickeyMousewhere
Mickey and Donald appear now in front of, now behind, the tree trunks of a forest. That
particular scene combines tile priority with tile scrolling, a technique revisited later in this
manual (Chapter 17). The practical example in this chapter uses only priority, without that
additional scrolling, but the result is already convincing on its own.
Figure 26: The reference scene in World of Illusion Starring Mickey Mouse
Mickey and Donald appear in front of some forest elements and behind others.
77

=== PAGE 84 ===
Prerequisites
Before continuing, you should have:
• Practicedthe16TileworkflowfromChapter13(creatingatilesetandamap)andChapter
14 (assigning more than one palette tile by tile).
• A clear grasp of the VDP priority concept introduced in Chapters 2 and 7: by default,
thedrawingordergoesfromBG_B(furthestback)toBG_A(inthemiddle)tothesprites
(frontmost), and the priority bit of TILE_ATTR_FULL() allows that order to be reversed.
• A tileset and a map already prepared in 16Tile, following the same workflow as the
previous two chapters.
1. From plane priority to tile priority
InChapter7,prioritywasappliedtoanentireplane: changingpriotoTRUEinTILE_ATTR_FULL()
made all of BG_B draw in front of BG_A. That granularity is enough for certain effects, but
not for something as specific as “the character passes behind this trunk but in front of that
bush,” because the trunk and the bush live on the same plane.
Thesolutionistoassigntheprioritybittilebytile,usingexactlythesamemechanismChapter
14 used to assign palettes tile by tile: instead of setting a single TILE_ATTR_FULL() value
for the whole map inside MAP_create(), 16Tile stores, for each individual tile, whether that
particulartileshouldbedrawnwithhighpriorityornot,andexportsthatinformationtogether
with the map.
2. The starting tileset and map
TheexampleinthischapterstartsfromasimplifiedtilesetforaWorldofIllusionlevel. Justas
in Chapter 14, that tileset uses two palettes: one for most of the trees and the ground, and a
separateoneforthemushrooms. Theprocessofcombiningbothpalettesintoasingletileset
and assigning them tile by tile was already explained in the previous chapter, so this chapter
takes that as known and focuses directly on priority.
The tileset already combines the two palettes mentioned above.
The mushroom tiles are marked with the second palette’s indicator.
3. Assigning high priority with the P button
16Tile assigns priority the same way it assigns palette: you first pick an option in the left-
hand panel, then paint it onto the tiles that should receive it. The P button activates priority-
assignment mode; any tile painted while that mode is active gets marked as high priority,
which is reflected by a brighter tint on those tiles within the editor itself.
Inthisexample,thetreetrunksintheforegroundaretheonesgivenhighpriority,sincethey
are the elements the character should not be able to walk in front of.
The column of tree trunk tiles is selected.
Within the editor, those tiles appear with a brighter tint.
Theconcreteeffectofthismarking: normallyallspritesaredrawninfrontofanybackground
tile, regardless of that background’s priority. By marking a specific tile as high priority, that
tile is drawn in front of the sprites instead of behind them, reversing the usual order only for
thosetiles. Thatselectivereversaliswhatproducesthedeptheffect: thecharactercanwalk
78

=== PAGE 85 ===
Figure 27: The simplified tileset for the World of Illusion level
Figure 28: The map assembled in 16Tile
79

=== PAGE 86 ===
Figure 29: Priority mode activated in 16Tile
Figure 30: The trunk tiles marked with high priority
80

=== PAGE 87 ===
behind the trunk marked as high priority, while still appearing normally in front of any other
tile in the same background that does not have that mark.
4. Exporting and integrating into SGDK
Exporting and integrating into the SGDK project follows the same procedure as Chapter 14:
exportingfrom16Tileagaingeneratesthepalette,thetileset,andthemap,readytobecopied
intotheresfolder. Sincethisexamplereusestheprojectfromthepreviouschapter,thetileset
and palette remain unchanged, and only the map file needs to be replaced with the new one
(woi_foreground.png in this example).
In resources.res, the MAP line must be updated to point to the new file:
MAP woi_foreground_map "woi_foreground.png" woi_tileset FAST
This chapter also replaces the playable character’s sprite with one of Mickey Mouse, both to
vary the example and because the new sprite is larger: 4 tiles wide by 6 tiles tall, instead of
thesmallerdimensionsusedsofar. ThatisalsoreflectedintheSPRITElineof resources.res:
SPRITE mickey_sprite "mickey.png" 4 6 FAST
5. Updating the constants in main.c
With Mickey’s sprite being larger, PLAYER_WIDTH and PLAYER_HEIGHT must be updated to the
sprite’s actual dimensions in pixels: 32×48, corresponding to the 4×6 tiles declared in re-
sources.res.
Likewise, MAP_WIDTH and MAP_HEIGHT — the constants that, as explained in Chapter 13, must
reflect the actual width and height of the map exported from 16Tile, values the tool itself
displays before exporting — need to be updated to the size of the new World of Illusion map
andnotleftwiththevaluesfromapreviousmap. Thisisaneasydetailtooverlookwhenonly
themapfileisreplacedwithoutreviewingtheseconstants,andamaploadedwiththewrong
dimensionsproducesdistortedbackgroundsorareasshowingthedefaultfillcolor(magenta)
when scrolling beyond its actual bounds.
#define PLAYER_WIDTH 32
#define PLAYER_HEIGHT 48
// Actual width and height of the map exported from 16Tile, in tiles
// (the specific values are read from the tool itself before exporting)
#define MAP_WIDTH 64
#define MAP_HEIGHT 32
6. The priority parameter in SPR_addSprite()
The only code change needed for the character to respect tile priority happens in the call to
SPR_addSprite(),initsTILE_ATTR(palette, priority, vflip, hflip)argument. Thesecond
parameter,thesprite’sownpriority,determineswhetherthatspritebehavesintheusualway
(low priority, FALSE) or takes precedence even over background tiles marked as high priority
(high priority, TRUE).
SPR_addSprite(&mickeySprite, x, y,
TILE_ATTR(PAL2, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
81

=== PAGE 88 ===
Leaving the sprite’s priority at FALSE, the character passes behind any background tile that
does have high priority, which is the effect sought in this example: Mickey ends up hidden
behind the trunk marked in 16Tile.
7. What happens if the sprite also has high priority
To see the other side of this relationship, it’s enough to also change the sprite’s priority to
TRUE:
SPR_addSprite(&mickeySprite, x, y,
TILE_ATTR(PAL2, TRUE, FALSE, FALSE));
With both — the trunk tile and the character sprite — set to high priority, Mickey once again
appears in front of the entire background, including the tiles that previously covered him.
The general rule, then, is as follows:
A sprite only ends up hidden behind a background tile when the sprite has low
priority and, in addition, that particular background tile has high priority. If the
sprite has high priority, it is shown in front of any background tile regardless of
that tile’s priority.
Settingthesprite’sprioritybacktoFALSErestorestheintendedbehavior: Mickeyonceagain
passes behind the trunk marked as high priority.
8. Possible improvements: a second background layer
Thepriorityeffectisalreadyconvincingonitsown,butitcanbeintensifiedbyaddingasecond
background layer behind the foreground map already built: using BG_A for the map with
tile priority (the front layer) and BG_B for a more distant background with simple parallax
scrolling, using the technique already covered in Chapter 9. No tile scrolling is needed to
achieve this improvement — that technique is revisited in Chapter 17 — and combining both
resources (tile priority plus an additional parallax layer) is exactly what produces the multi-
layered sense of depth in the original World of Illusion scene.
If 16Tile or a similar tool is ever unavailable, the same per-tile priority can be assigned by
handinthecode,withoutrelyingonanexternalscript;thatalternativeiscoveredinChapter
16.
Review exercises
1. Explain, in terms of the usual ordering between sprites and background, exactly what
changes when a tile is marked as high priority in 16Tile.
2. What is the difference between the full-plane priority used in Chapter 7 and the per-tile
priority covered in this chapter?
3. Which parameter of TILE_ATTR(), used in SPR_addSprite(), determines the priority of
the sprite itself, and what happens if that parameter is left at TRUE instead of FALSE?
4. Ifaspritehashighpriorityandabackgroundtilealsohashighpriority,whichofthetwo
is shown in front of the other?
5. Brieflydescribehowthetilepriorityfromthischaptercouldbecombinedwithasecond
background layer, to get closer to the visual effect of the reference scene from World of
Illusion.
82

=== PAGE 89 ===
Chapter 16 — Manually Assigning
Tile Priority Without a Script
This chapter presents a manual method for assigning tile priority to a background, as an
alternative to the automated Lua script workflow that is picked up later, in Chapter 19. That
automated method works well, but it has a cost: on a large map, with many tiles marked as
priority, processing can take several minutes. The technique in this chapter aims at exactly
the same result —high- and low-priority tiles coexisting on the same background— but done
by hand, tile by tile, with more direct control over each step.
This is a brief addendum, not a new topic: it assumes familiarity with the row-based palette
structure already used to encode tile priority, so it’s worth having Chapters 14 and 15 fresh
in mind before continuing.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• ReadChapters14and15,onmultiplepaletteswithinasinglebackgroundandondepth
via tile priority, in order to understand what problem tile priority solves in terms of the
MegaDrivehardware, andwhattherow-basedpalettestructureis—normalrows, filler
rows, and priority rows— that this chapter completes by hand instead of with a script.
• Basic familiarity with Aseprite: layers, selection, copy and paste, and the difference
between RGB and Indexed color mode.
• SGDK installed; if you’re going to update it to version 2.11 following the last section of
thischapter,ithelpstohavetheproject’scodeeditoronhand,foritssearch-and-replace
features.
1. Analyzing the palette layout of a real-world example
A good exercise before applying the technique is to analyze how a commercial game dis-
tributes its colors across palettes. The first level of Alien 3 serves as a good example of tile
priority: there’s a single scrolling background and, on top of it, within the same foreground
layer, some columns let the character pass in front of them and others behind, which gives
the scene a sense of depth.
ThefirstlevelofAlien3: differentcolumnsintheforegroundusetileprioritysothecharacter
appears in front of or behind them.
The foreground of this level uses two palettes, PAL0 and PAL1, and although in principle all
four palettes could be used within a single background —as long as each tile uses only one
ofthem—,acarefulanalysisrevealsthattheactuallayoutinthisexampleisfairlyinefficient:
83

=== PAGE 90 ===
Figure 31: The first level of Alien 3
there’s quite a bit of color duplication between palettes, with black and several shades of
gray repeating in almost all of them. Counting the truly distinct colors used by the level, you
arrive at 44 unique colors, out of a possible maximum of 61.
A close-up of the level’s palette: black and several shades of gray repeat across more than
one of the four rows.
Goingdeeper: wheredoesthatmaximumof61comefrom,iffour16-colorpalettes
add up to 64? The color at index 0 of each palette is always the transparent color
for tiles using that palette, and of the four times that index 0 appears (one per
palette), only one actually ends up shown on screen, as the general background
color. The other three are, in practice, palette space that can no longer be used to
draw anything visible. Four 16-color palettes minus those three redundant entries
give exactly 61 colors available for simultaneous use. Going beyond that barrier of
61 simultaneous colors is possible with more advanced palette-management tech-
niques, which remain an interesting topic to explore further on your own.
2. Preparing a working copy
To avoid risking the original file, the first step is to work on a copy. On the original graphic,
select all (Ctrl+A) and copy (Ctrl+C); then create a new file (Ctrl+N) of the exact same size
as the original, and paste the copy into it (Ctrl+V). With that copy ready, copy the first four
rows of the original palette —the 64 entries representing the four hardware palettes— and
paste them into the new file’s palette, also switching its color mode to Indexed.
Thefreshlypreparedworkingfile: thetoprowsretaintherealcolorscopiedfromtheoriginal,
the middle band is painted a flat color to set it apart, and the bottom band doesn’t yet have
the high-priority palette defined.
84

=== PAGE 91 ===
Figure 32: Close-up of the Alien 3 palette
Figure 33: Freshly prepared working file
85

=== PAGE 92 ===
This layout is the same twelve-row palette structure used to encode tile priority: four rows
with the real palettes, four filler rows with no use at all, and four final rows reserved for the
high-priority version. The difference here is that it’s filled in by hand, tile by tile, instead of
lettinganautomatedprocessdoit. Tokeeptheexamplesimple,ithelpstoconcentrateallthe
work on a single palette —PAL1, for instance— even though the actual level also uses PAL0
in other areas; that doesn’t change the procedure, it just needs to be repeated.
3. Isolating the high-priority tiles
With the working copy ready, the next step is to keep only the tiles that will be high priority,
deleting all the rest. Priority, just like palette, is assigned tile by tile, so you need to be
carefulnottoaccidentallyeraseonlypartofan8×8pixeltile. Thesafestwaytoavoidthatis
to first convert the layer into a tileset layer, so that any selection or deletion is automatically
constrained within the boundaries of each tile.
Figure 34: Layer converted to a tileset
Thelayeralreadyconvertedintoatileset,withthestripofuniquedetectedtilesatthebottom.
With that safeguard in place, delete all the tiles that should end up as low priority, leaving
visible only the ones that should end up as high priority: in the Alien 3 example, the part
of the staircase the character passes behind, and the front of the larger columns, which the
character also passes behind. The rest of the floor and the smaller columns, which remain
low priority, are deleted from this copy.
The working copy after deleting the low-priority tiles: only the priority tiles remain visible,
with the rest of the canvas transparent.
86

=== PAGE 93 ===
Figure 35: Working copy after deleting low-priority tiles
4. Giving them an unmistakable temporary palette: the
Master System palette
The next step is to assign these surviving tiles a palette completely different from the four
low-priority palettes, so they can be identified without any ambiguity later on. For that, it
helps to use one of Aseprite’s preset palettes: the Master System palette, from Sega’s 8-bit
console that preceded the Mega Drive.
The list of Aseprite preset palettes, with the Master System palette highlighted.
This palette turns out to be especially convenient for this task, regardless of any interest
in Master System graphics, because it has exactly 64 colors that are all completely distinct
fromoneanother—thesamenumberofentriesoccupiedbythefourlow-priorityrows. Once
loaded,anytileusingitstandsoutimmediatelyfromthelow-prioritytiles,withnopossibility
of confusing them at a glance.
The Master System palette already loaded, with its 64 colors, all different from each other.
Attention: there’s a single exception to keep in mind. The first color in the Master
Systempaletteisapureblack(RGB0,0,0),exactlythesamevalueprobablyalready
being used as black in the Mega Drive palette. If it isn’t modified, that color stops
beingunmistakable. Thesimplesolutionistoslightlyalterthatblack—forexample,
nudginguponeofitsthreevalues—togetashadethatstillreadsasblack,butthat
is numerically distinct from any black already present in the low-priority palette.
87

=== PAGE 94 ===
Figure 36: List of Aseprite preset palettes
Figure 37: Master System palette loaded
88

=== PAGE 95 ===
5. Transplanting the high-priority tiles into the original
file
With the Master System palette already adjusted, copy it in full —its 64 colors— and paste it
over the palette of the working file (the one from section 3, with only the high-priority tiles).
SincethatfileisalreadyinIndexedmode,thepaletteswapimmediatelyrecolorsallthetiles:
theonesthatusedthePAL1row,forexample,nowshowthesecondrowoftheMasterSystem
palette instead.
Tip: ifpastingtheMasterSystempalettedoesn’tchangethetiles’colors,thefileis
mostlikelystillinRGBmoderatherthanIndexedmode. Withoutthatmodechange,
each pixel keeps its literal color value instead of referencing a palette position, so
replacing the palette has no visible effect on the artwork.
Figure 38: High-priority tiles recolored with Master System
Thehigh-prioritytilesnowrecoloredwiththeMasterSystempalette: wherePAL1usedtobe,
there’s now a completely different, unmistakable color.
Thesameprocedureisrepeatedontheoriginalfile: copythealready-adjustedMasterSystem
paletteandpasteit, thistime,overthefinalfourrowsofthatfile—theoneswhich, following
the structure already covered, are reserved for the high-priority version and still have no
color defined.
Thefinalfourrowsoftheoriginalfile,stillundefined,rightbeforereceivingtheMasterSystem
palette.
Thelaststepinthissectionistocopythehigh-prioritytilesthemselves—notjusttheirpalette,
buttheiractualgraphiccontent—fromtheworkingfileintotheoriginalfile. Todothat,they
need to be selected by clicking inside the color-index panel, in the top-left corner, and not
within the canvas area: selecting there, Ctrl+A and Ctrl+C copy the tiles together with their
new palette, and they get pasted directly onto the original file, in the same position they
occupied before the low-priority tiles were deleted.
89

=== PAGE 96 ===
Figure 39: Final four rows still undefined
Figure 40: Immediate result after pasting
90

=== PAGE 97 ===
The immediate result after pasting: the high-priority tiles, still with the eye-catching Master
System colors, overlaid in their original position within the complete file.
Atthispoint,theoriginalfilehasthecompletetwelve-rowpalettestructure: thefirstfourrows
withthereallow-prioritycolors,thenextfourasfiller,andthelastfourwiththehigh-priority
tiles, still colored with the Master System palette instead of their real colors.
6. Checking for palette mixing, and restoring the real col-
ors
Before saving and considering the file finished, it’s worth taking advantage of how eye-
catchingtheMasterSystemcolorsaretodoafullvisualcheck: filleachoftheeightrelevant
rows —the four low-priority ones and the four high-priority ones— with a single flat color,
eachoneclearlydifferentfromtheothers,andgothroughtheentirefilelookingforanypixel
that doesn’t match the color that should correspond to its row.
Figure 41: Flat-color test taken to an extreme case
Theflat-colortesttakentoanextremecase: eachhalfofthepalettepaintedaclearlydifferent
color, so that any assignment error is impossible to miss.
The same test applied to the level’s actual tiles: any pixel that wasn’t exactly one of the two
control colors would immediately reveal a palette error.
Onceit’sconfirmedthatthere’snomixingbetweenpalettes—exceptforthetransparentcolor,
which can legitimately appear in any row without being an error—, the final step is to undo
this test and restore each row’s real color: both the four low-priority rows and the four high-
priority rows get back the true colors from the game’s art, and only then is the file saved for
importing into SGDK.
Goingdeeper: thismanualmethodmakessomethingclearthat’salsoworthkeeping
in mind when thinking about the script-based workflow in Chapter 19: the high-
91

=== PAGE 98 ===
Figure 42: Flat-color test applied to the actual tiles
priorityrowsendupcontainingexactlythesamerealcolorsastheircorresponding
low-priority rows, and the only thing that distinguishes them, as far as SGDK is
concerned, is the position of those rows within the palette —rows 8 through 11
instead of 0 through 3— not any special color or visible marker in the final image.
It’s reasonable to think that the script mentioned in Chapter 19 achieves, in effect,
an equivalent result internally, although that particular part of its inner workings
was not directly confirmed. What can be stated with certainty is that, in their final
effect on the compiled game, both methods are interchangeable: they produce the
same tile-priority behavior on screen.
The final result combines the parallax scrolling background, a foreground with columns of
different priority, and test sprites overlaid on top, as already worked on in previous chapters.
Deciding which tiles should be marked as priority is, to a large extent, a matter of visual
trial and adjustment and not just a mechanical procedure: reviewing the result on the Alien
3 example, for instance, a couple of smaller columns that had been left as low priority would
also have looked better marked as priority.
7. Updating to SGDK 2.11
One change to keep in mind when updating a project to SGDK 2.11 is that the names of the
functionsforconvertingfixed-pointvaluestointegerschanged: thefunctionpreviouslycalled
fix32ToIntisnowcalledF32_toInt(thesamechangeappliestothe16-bitvariant,fix16ToInt
→F16_toInt,alreadycoveredinChapter6). Atypicalexampleofthisconversion,updatedto
its current form, looks like this:
// SGDK 2.11 onward
fix32 velocidadY = FIX32(2.5);
posY += velocidadY;
92

=== PAGE 99 ===
// Conversion to integer, for example, to compare against a tile position
s16 posYEntera = F32_toInt(posY);
Insteadofchangingeveryoccurrenceofthefunctionbyhand,it’sbesttousethecodeeditor’s
search-and-replacefeature: searchfortheoldname,typethenewnameintothereplacement
field, and apply the option to replace all matches in the project at once, rather than one at a
time.
Figure 43: Search-and-replace dialog
The editor’s search-and-replace dialog, with the old function name and its replacement al-
ready typed in, ready to be applied to every match in the project.
A general recommendation, valid for any SGDK version update and not just this one in par-
ticular: it’s worth deleting the boot folder, located inside the project’s src folder. SGDK
automatically generates a new boot folder, corresponding to the installed version, the next
time the project is compiled.
Review exercises
1. Explain why four 16-color palettes allow, at most, 61 truly visible colors on screen and
not 64.
2. Why is it a good idea to convert the layer into a tileset before deleting the low-priority
tiles, rather than deleting them directly on a regular layer?
3. Explain specifically what the Master System palette is used for in this procedure, and
what particular precaution needs to be taken with its first color before using it.
4. Basedonwhat’sexplainedinthischapter,whatactuallydistinguishesahigh-prioritytile
from a low-priority tile in the final file that gets imported into SGDK?
93

=== PAGE 100 ===
5. What specific change needs to be taken into account when updating an existing project
to SGDK 2.11 regarding fixed-point-to-integer conversions, and which code editor tool
is best used to apply it safely across the whole project?
94

=== PAGE 101 ===
Chapter 17 — Tile Scrolling
The Mega Drive has only two scrollable background planes, BG_A and BG_B. In principle, that
limits a game to just two independent parallax “layers” on screen at once. Tile scrolling
(tile scrolling) is the technique that lets you stretch that limit quite a bit further: instead of
shifting an entire plane as a single block — as was done in chapter 9 with HSCROLL_PLANE —
each 8-pixel-tall row of that same plane is shifted independently, with its own speed and its
own direction. Used well, the effect gives the impression that the console is handling four or
five parallax layers at once, even though the hardware still only has two.
Chapter 2 already introduced, at a conceptual level, that the VDP supports three levels of
granularity for horizontal scrolling — per plane, per tile, and per line — and two for vertical
scrolling — per plane and per column. Chapter 9 put code to the first of those variants, the
simplest one. This chapter picks up that foundation and extends it toward the intermediate
granularity: horizontal scrolling per tile. Along the way, it introduces two C tools that will
accompanythereaderfortherestofthemanual: arrays,mentionedinpassingbackinchapter
6 but not explained in detail until now, and for loops, which appear for the first time in this
manual with a dedicated explanation.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Completed chapter 9, “Scrolling and Parallax Scrolling,” since this chapter builds on
thesametypeofproject(abackgroundplanedrawnwithVDP_drawImageEx)anddirectly
reusesVDP_setScrollingMode,thethree-sectionorganizationof main(),andthepattern
of accumulating a displacement in fix16/fix32 and converting it to an integer before
passing it to the VDP.
• The three scrolling granularities introduced conceptually in chapter 2 (per plane, per
tile/column, and per line).
• The S16, U8, and FIX16 types from chapter 6.
• Basic notions of C: variable declaration, the structure of a while loop, and the use of
square brackets to index a position within a collection of values (explained in detail in
section 4 of this chapter).
1. What tile scrolling is and what it’s for
To see the effect clearly, it helps to have a test background where each 8-pixel-tall row is
numbered or easily distinguishable from the next, so you can immediately tell which row is
moving at any given moment.
The test background used in this chapter: each row of tiles is numbered, so you can tell at a
glance which one is scrolling at any moment and in which direction.
95

=== PAGE 102 ===
Figure 44: Test background with numbered tile rows
Thecoreideaissimpletostate,thoughithasmoremovingpartsthanplanescrolling: instead
of a single displacement variable for the whole plane, you need one displacement value per
visiblerowonthescreen. Withthestandardverticalresolutionof224pixels(seechapter10)
and8-pixel-talltiles,thatcomesoutto224÷8=28rows. Therestofthischapterdealswith
declaring those 28 values, updating them frame by frame, and doing so without repeating
code 28 times.
2. Turning on tile scrolling mode
ThefirststepistotellSGDKthat,fortheplaneyou’regoingtouse,horizontalscrollingshould
be handled row by row instead of moving as a single block. This is configured with the same
function already used in chapter 9, VDP_setScrollingMode(), but with a different value for
the horizontal mode:
VDP_setScrollingMode(HSCROLL_TILE, VSCROLL_PLANE);
Asarecapfromchapter2,thehorizontalscrollingoptionsareHSCROLL_PLANE(thewholeplane
as a single block, the variant from chapter 9), HSCROLL_TILE (each 8-pixel row independently,
theonecoveredhere),andHSCROLL_LINE(each1-pixellineindependently,thefinestgranular-
ity, revisited at the end of this chapter). For the vertical axis, the options are VSCROLL_PLANE
andVSCROLL_COLUMN—thelatterreplacingtheoldVSCROLL_2TILE,asalreadynotedinchapter
9. This chapter uses HSCROLL_TILE for the horizontal axis and VSCROLL_PLANE for the vertical
one, since only the horizontal displacement of each row is being worked with.
Combining horizontal tile scroll with vertical tile scroll: unconfirmed.
There’snopracticalverification,withinthescopeofthischapter,ofwhetherit’spos-
sibletocombineHSCROLL_TILEwithanindependentcolumnscroll(VSCROLL_COLUMN)
on the same plane at the same time. There’s reason to suspect it isn’t — the VDP
96

=== PAGE 103 ===
mightnotofferthatparticularcombination—butthat’sareasonablesuspicion,not
a confirmed fact checked against SGDK’s official documentation. Before designing
an effect that depends on that combination, it’s worth testing it first in a small
project and checking the result on screen.
3. Updating the scroll every frame: VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile
Turning on tile scrolling mode only tells SGDK what type of scrolling is going to be used;
you still need the function that actually moves each row, which has to be called inside the
main loop (while), since the displacement needs to be updated every frame. That function is
VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile(), and it takes five parameters:
void VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile(VDPPlane plane, s16 tileY, s16 *values, s16 num,
↪ u16 useDMA);
• plane: the background layer the tile scroll is applied to, BG_A or BG_B.
• tileY: the tile row, counted from the top, at which the effect starts being applied. With
0, the effect is applied starting from the first visible row, which is useful when there are
elements — clouds, for example — that need to move starting from the very top of the
screen.
• values: the array that holds the displacement value for each row, discussed in the next
section.
• num: the number of tile rows that need to be updated. With the standard vertical resolu-
tion of 224 pixels and tiles 8 pixels tall, that number is 28.
• useDMA (or the equivalent name for the transfer method): SGDK recommends using
DMA_QUEUE for this parameter, since several rows need to be updated every frame, and
queuing the transfer via DMA avoids blocking the CPU while the data is copied.
4. Arrays: declaring the position array
In chapter 9, a single variable was enough to store how much a plane had shifted along the
horizontal axis. That’s not enough here: since each of the 28 rows can move independently,
you need to store one displacement value per row, and for that you need an array instead of
a single variable.
An array is, essentially, a collection of variables of the same type, all grouped under a single
name and accessed via a numeric index. It’s declared similarly to an ordinary variable, but
with square brackets added containing the number of elements it will hold:
S16 tile_scroll_array[28];
This reserves space for 28 values of type S16 (a signed 16-bit integer, which is more than
enough for pixel displacements, whether positive or negative), all accessible through the
same name, tile_scroll_array. To access a specific element of the array, you use the name
followed by the index in square brackets, always starting from 0: tile_scroll_array[0] is
the first element, tile_scroll_array[27] is the last of the 28.
Indexes start at 0. Index 0 of an array corresponds to the first element, not the
second. Inthischapter,thatmeanstile_scroll_array[0]isthefirstvisiblerowon
screen, not the second; this is a common off-by-one mistake when you’re starting
out with arrays.
With all values at zero, which is the initial state before any movement code is written, no
row moves yet. To check that the array and VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile() are properly
97

=== PAGE 104 ===
connected, it’s enough to manually assign a value to a specific index: positive to move that
row to the right, negative to move it to the left. For example, tile_scroll_array[0] = 10;
shifts the first row 10 pixels to the right, while tile_scroll_array[1] = -5; shifts the next
row 5 pixels to the left. Once compiled, each row ends up shifted according to the sign and
magnitude of the value you assigned it.
5. Dynamic scrolling with += and -=
Assigning a fixed value, as in the previous section, produces a static, one-time displacement.
Toachievecontinuousmovement, eachrowneedstochangeitsdisplacementvalueframeby
frame, inside the while loop. The simplest way is to take the current value of an array index
and add or subtract a fixed amount on each pass, using the += and -= operators:
while(1)
{
tile_scroll_array[0] += 1; // row 0 advances 1 pixel per frame to the right
tile_scroll_array[20] -= 2; // row 20 advances 2 pixels per frame to the left
VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile(BG_B, 0, tile_scroll_array, 28, DMA_QUEUE);
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
Eachrowcanthushaveitsownoperatoranditsownspeed,movingcompletelyindependently
of the rest.
6. Fractional displacement with FIX16
One pixel per frame is a good pace for many elements, but for backgrounds that need
to move much more slowly — distant clouds, for example — it’s useful to be able
to add an amount smaller than a full pixel, such as 0.5 or 0.1. The problem is that
VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile()onlyacceptsintegervaluesthroughitsS16array,sothere’s
no direct way to add a fraction of a pixel to tile_scroll_array.
The solution is the same one already used in chapter 9 to solve the same problem for plane
scrolling, nowapplied rowbyrow: asecondarray, withthe samenumberof elements, butof
type FIX16 instead of S16. FIX16 is the 16-bit variant of the fixed-point types already covered
in chapter 6 (FIX32 was used in chapter 9 for the fractional displacement of an entire plane);
here the lighter version is enough, because background scrolling doesn’t need that much
precision. To distinguish it from the original array, it helps to add a suffix to the name:
FIX16 tile_scroll_array_as_f16[28];
// inside the while loop:
tile_scroll_array_as_f16[1] += FIX16(0.5); // accumulates half a pixel per frame
Addingavaluetothisarraydoesn’tmoveanythingbyitself,becauseVDP_setHorizontalScrollTile()
still works with the original integer array. What’s still needed is to convert the accumulated
FIX16 value into an integer and copy that result into the same position of the S16 array,
before it’s used in the scroll function. For that conversion, SGDK 2.11 uses F16_toInt() —
the FIX16 equivalent of the F32_toInt() function already used in chapter 9 for FIX32:
tile_scroll_array_as_f16[1] += FIX16(0.5);
tile_scroll_array[1] = F16_toInt(tile_scroll_array_as_f16[1]);
98

=== PAGE 105 ===
7. For loops to avoid repeating code
So far, every row you want to animate with fractional speed needs its own two lines of code:
one to add the speed to the FIX16 array, and another to convert that value to an integer and
copyitintotheS16array. Repeatingthatsamepairoflines28times—onceperrow—would
be a sure source of copy-paste errors and pretty messy code. This is the point to introduce,
with a dedicated explanation for the first time in this manual, the for loop.
Thesyntaxofaforloophasthreeparts,separatedbysemicolons,insidetheparenthesesthat
follow the word for:
for (U8 i = 0; i < 28; i++)
{
// loop body: runs once for each value of i
}
• The first part, U8 i = 0, declares a control variable and gives it an initial value. U8 is
used because that type goes up to 255 and the array only has 28 elements; the name i
is a very widespread convention in C, though it could be called anything else.
• Thesecondpart,i < 28,istheconditionevaluatedbeforeeachpass: aslongasit’strue,
the loop keeps repeating. With this condition, the loop runs through indexes 0 to 27,
which are exactly the 28 valid elements of the array.
• The third part, i++, is the instruction executed at the end of each pass: it adds one to i,
so that the condition will eventually stop being true and the loop will end.
The control variable only exists inside the loop. Avariabledeclaredinsidethe
parenthesesofafor,likeiintheexample,onlyexistswithinthebracesthatdelimit
that loop’s body. Outside of that, the compiler doesn’t recognize it. That’s why it’s
safe to reuse the same name, i, in several different for loops within the same file:
each one has its own copy, isolated from the others.
This chapter uses two for loops for different purposes.
The first is used inside main(), and therefore runs only once, when the program starts:
instead of writing 28 zeros by hand to initialize tile_scroll_array, and another 28 for
tile_scroll_array_as_f16, a single loop runs the index from 0 to 27 and assigns zero to
both arrays on each pass:
S16 tile_scroll_array[28];
FIX16 tile_scroll_array_as_f16[28];
int main()
{
// ... palette loading and background drawing, as in chapter 9 ...
for (U8 i = 0; i < 28; i++)
{
tile_scroll_array[i] = 0;
tile_scroll_array_as_f16[i] = FIX16(0);
}
VDP_setScrollingMode(HSCROLL_TILE, VSCROLL_PLANE);
while(1)
{
// ...
}
99

=== PAGE 106 ===
return (0);
}
It’s best to declare the arrays first, with empty braces (that is, without initializing their ele-
mentsyet),andwritetheforloopafterward: iftheloopappearedbeforethearraysexist,the
compiler flags an error.
The second for loop appears inside the while, and therefore runs every frame of the game.
This one isn’t for zeroing everything out — the previous loop already did that, just once —
but rather to replace the two lines that previously had to be repeated by hand for each row:
inside the loop’s body, the corresponding speed is added to the FIX16 array and the result is
converted to an integer with F16_toInt(), using the loop’s index i instead of a fixed number,
so that a single instance of those two lines is enough to update all 28 rows.
8. A third array for speeds, and named variables
Theloopfromtheprevioussectionneedsathirdarray: onethatstoresthescrollspeedofeach
row, in FIX16. This array can’t be initialized with a for loop like the previous two, because
itsvalues aren’t all thesame: some rows mightrepresent clouds, others mountains, others a
forest,andeachmovesatadifferentpace. Ithelpstocallitscroll_speed_array_as_f16,and
manually assign the speed value for each row:
FIX16 scroll_speed_array_as_f16[28] = {
FIX16(0.1), FIX16(0.1), FIX16(0.1), // rows 0-2: distant clouds
FIX16(0.5), FIX16(0.5), // rows 3-4: mountains
// ... the rest of the rows, each with its own speed
};
// inside the while loop, replacing the two repeated lines:
for (U8 i = 0; i < 28; i++)
{
tile_scroll_array_as_f16[i] += scroll_speed_array_as_f16[i];
tile_scroll_array[i] = F16_toInt(tile_scroll_array_as_f16[i]);
}
VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile(BG_B, 0, tile_scroll_array, 28, DMA_QUEUE);
Grouping repeated speeds under a named variable. When several consecu-
tive rows should always move at the same speed — for example, several rows that
together make up a layer of clouds — instead of writing the same numeric value
at each of those positions, it’s better to declare a named FIX16 variable, such as
cloud_speed, assign it the value once, and use it at every relevant position in the
array:
FIX16 cloud_speed = FIX16(0.1);
FIX16 scroll_speed_array_as_f16[28] = {
cloud_speed, cloud_speed, cloud_speed,
FIX16(0.5), FIX16(0.5),
// ...
};
That way, if the cloud speed needs adjusting later on, it’s enough to change a sin-
gle value in a single place, instead of hunting down and fixing that same figure
100

=== PAGE 107 ===
repeated across three, four, or five different positions in the array. If those same
rows needed to represent clouds moving in the opposite direction from the rest of
the background, it’s enough to give that variable a negative value, with no need to
create a new variable.
9. Beyond this chapter
With the three arrays and the two for loops in place, the final code ends up considerably
shorter than it would have been writing each row by hand, even though fractional displace-
ment and per-row speed management are, at bottom, repetitive tasks.
Combiningthistechniquewithtoolsalreadycoveredinearlierchapters—usingbothplanes,
BG_A and BG_B, each with its own tile scroll; adjusting tile priority between both planes, as
in chapter 16; and adding background sprites above or below certain rows — the number
of parallax layers you can simulate in practice grows well beyond the console’s two physical
layers.
Thehorizontaltilescrollingcoveredinthischapterhasanevenfinerequivalent,linescrolling
(HSCROLL_LINE,mentionedinsection2),which,insteadofmoving8-pixelrows,movesindivid-
ual 1-pixel lines. The code approach is equivalent to this chapter’s — an array of values, a
per-frameupdatefunction,thesameforloops—justwithmanymorepositionstoiterateover
(192linesinsteadof28rows,atthestandardresolution). Asanexercisetopracticethatfiner
variant, you can try recreating a Thunder Force IV-style parallax scene using HSCROLL_LINE
instead of HSCROLL_TILE.
Review exercises
1. Explain the difference between HSCROLL_PLANE, HSCROLL_TILE, and HSCROLL_LINE, and in
what situation each one is the right choice.
2. Why does the array passed to VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile() have 28 elements, and
exactly where does that number come from? How many elements would the equivalent
array have if HSCROLL_LINE were used instead of HSCROLL_TILE?
3. Explain why a second array in FIX16 is needed to achieve speeds lower than one pixel
per frame, and which function is used to convert those values before passing them to
VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile().
4. Why can’t the speed array (scroll_speed_array_as_f16) be initialized with a for loop
the same way as the other two arrays in this chapter?
5. A teammate writes the following code and wonders why it doesn’t compile:
int main()
{
for (U8 i = 0; i < 28; i++)
{
tile_scroll_array[i] = 0;
}
S16 tile_scroll_array[28];
// ...
}
Identify the error and explain why the order of the lines matters in this case.
101

=== PAGE 108 ===
Chapter 18 — Background Tile
Animation
Up to this point in the manual, VRAM has been treated as something that gets filled once,
when loading a level, and then stays fixed for the rest of the game’s execution. This chapter
breaks with that idea: it shows how to replace, at any moment and while the game keeps
running, one or several specific tiles within VRAM that has already been loaded. That capa-
bilityisthefoundationof backgroundtileanimation, the techniqueusedbygameslike Sonic
theHedgehogtogivecertainsceneryelements, suchastorches, water,orflowers, theirown
animation cycle independent of the rest of the background, without needing to touch sprites
or reload anything.
TheexampleusedthroughoutthechapteristheyellowflowersinthebackgroundofGreenHill
Zone, the first level of Sonic the Hedgehog, which spin continuously in place. The chapter
starts from a demo with that level’s background and foreground already loaded and with
parallaxscrollingbetweenthetwolayers,andbuildsthecompleteanimationofthoseflowers
step by step.
Prerequisites
• Having read chapter 7 (how to display backgrounds) and chapter 9 (scrolling and paral-
lax scrolling), since this chapter starts from a demo with those same elements already
working.
• Having read chapter 2 (the VDP in depth), to have a clear picture of how VRAM is or-
ganized, and chapter 16 (multiple palettes and tile priority), to be familiar with the way
SGDK organizes a background’s tiles in VRAM when loading a level.
• Basic knowledge of C: arrays, conditional structures (if / else if), and increment oper-
ators.
• BasichandlingofAseprite,inparticularconvertingalayerintoatileset,alreadyusedin
chapter 12.
1. The starting point: VDP_loadTileData
This chapter’s initial demo is simple: an urban background with parallax scrolling behind it,
andaGreenHillZoneforegroundwithitscharacteristicgrass,palmtrees,andyellowflowers.
The chapter’s initial demo: the Green Hill Zone foreground, with its yellow flowers, over an
urban background with parallax scrolling.
Thischapter’scentralfunctionisVDP_loadTileData,whichletsyouwritenewtiledatadirectly
into VRAM, at any time, without needing to reload the entire level. It takes four parameters:
the tile data to load (normally the pointer to a tileset from an image already imported into
102

=== PAGE 109 ===
Figure 45: The chapter’s initial demo, with the Green Hill Zone foreground over the urban
background with parallax scrolling
resources.res), the VRAM index at which to start writing, the number of tiles to write, and
the transfer method, for which this chapter uses DMA_QUEUE.
VDP_loadTileData(datos_de_tiles, indice_vram_destino, cantidad_de_tiles,
↪ DMA_QUEUE);
There is another function with a very similar name, VDP_loadTileSet, which was
alreadyusedinearlierchapterstoloadthetilesetofafulllevelmap. Itsparameters
are different, so even if one function is mistaken for the other due to a typo, the
compiler flags the problem right away. VDP_loadTileSet is for loading a complete
tileset when starting a level; VDP_loadTileData is for replacing specific tiles at any
time, even while the game is running.
2. Understanding the VRAM map with the ind variable
Before you can change specific tiles in VRAM, you need to understand how it’s organized.
When loading a level’s graphics, SGDK already uses a variable, usually called ind, to know
at which VRAM address it should write the background tiles, and then the foreground
tiles, without either one overlapping the other. That variable starts out with the value of
TILE_USER_INDEX, an SGDK constant marking the first VRAM position free for the program
to use (see chapter 2 for details on how VRAM is organized overall).
BlastEm’s VRAM debugger lets you see, tile by tile, what’s loaded at each position. In this
chapter’s demo, right before where the background tiles start, there are 16 tiles that at first
glance look a bit confusing: they’re actually the first 16 colors of the palette, represented as
solid-color blocks, rather than actual graphical tiles.
BlastEm’sVRAMdebugger: beforethebackgroundandforegroundtiles,16solid-colorblocks
103

=== PAGE 110 ===
Figure 46: BlastEm’s VRAM debugger, with 16 solid-color blocks before the background and
foreground tiles
appear, corresponding to the first 16 colors of the palette.
3. Experimenting with the base index
Those16tilesdon’thavetobekeptastheyare: inpractice,it’susuallysafetooverwritethem
with the background’s own tiles, gaining 16 tiles of VRAM that would otherwise go unused.
In general, it’s best not to touch SGDK’s default settings without a good reason,
since they’re usually set up that way for a reason. In this particular case, however,
overwriting those 16 tiles is safe.
To verify this, 16 is subtracted from the initial value of ind, so that the background starts
being written 16 positions earlier than usual, right where those color blocks used to be:
u16 ind = TILE_USER_INDEX - 16;
After compiling, those 16 solid-color tiles disappear from the VRAM debugger: the back-
ground now starts exactly where those blocks used to be, without leaving any gap.
It’salsoworthtryingtheoppositecase,asasanitycheck: insteadofsubtracting16,add100
to the initial value (u16 ind = TILE_USER_INDEX + 100;). The result is a gap of 100 unused
tiles between the color blocks and the start of the background tiles, immediately visible in
the VRAM debugger.
Finally, it’s worth understanding what happens if the adjustment is too aggressive: subtract-
ing 17 instead of 16. In that case, the background starts being written one position ear-
lier than it should, overwriting VRAM data that doesn’t belong to it, related to scrolling and
palettes, and the result on screen ends up visibly broken. In this particular case, then, 16 is
the exact margin available: that figure shouldn’t be exceeded.
104

=== PAGE 111 ===
4. Storing the background and foreground addresses in an
array
Tobeabletoanimatetileslateron,youneedtoknowatwhichVRAMaddressthebackground
tiles start and at which address the foreground tiles start, and to have both values available
anywhere in the code, not just at the moment the level was loaded. The solution is to store
thosetwoaddressesinatwo-elementarray,insteadoflettingtheindvariableoverwritethem
as it advances:
u16 background_tile_index[2];
Withinthecodethatalreadyloadsthelevel,it’senoughtoaddonelinerightafterwritingthe
background tiles, and another after writing the foreground tiles, to copy the current value of
indatthatmomentintothecorrespondingarrayposition: background_tile_index[0]forthe
background and background_tile_index[1] for the foreground.
// after loading the background tiles
background_tile_index[0] = ind;
// ... more loading code ...
// after loading the foreground tiles
background_tile_index[1] = ind;
5. Testing the VRAM change with a test tile
With those two addresses stored, VDP_loadTileData can now be tested with a simple case: a
single 8x8-pixel test tile, with an easily recognizable design (concentric squares of different
colors)soit’seasytospotwhereitappearsonceloadedintoVRAM.Thistileisimportedinto
resources.res as an image, not as a sprite, with the last two import parameters set to NONE
instead of BEST and ALL as was done with background images; the reason for this detail is
explained later, in section 10, on compression.
The8x8-pixeltesttile,withaneasilyrecognizableconcentric-squaresdesignonceloadedinto
VRAM.
Insidethegame’smainloop(thesame while loopalreadyusedfortheper-tilescrollingfrom
chapter 17), VDP_loadTileData is called using the tiles from that test image as the first pa-
rameter, background_tile_index[0] as the destination VRAM index (the address where the
backgroundtilesstart),1asthenumberoftilestocopy,andDMA_QUEUEasthetransfermethod:
VDP_loadTileData(square_image.tileset->tiles, background_tile_index[0], 1,
↪ DMA_QUEUE);
The result replaces the background’s first tile (in this case, a sky tile) with the test square,
andthatchangeisreflectedineveryinstanceofthattilewithinthebackground,notjustone.
Adding 1 to the index affects the second tile in the sequence (a building edge); adding 8, the
eighth (part of a roof). The same procedure, but using background_tile_index[1] instead
of background_tile_index[0], lets you change foreground tiles instead of background ones:
adding0replacesthefullytransparenttilethatthislayer’stilesstartwith,andadding1,the
corner of a tree leaf.
The general pattern for replacing any specific tile in a background or foreground
is always the same: take the starting address of that layer stored in the array, add
105

=== PAGE 112 ===
Figure 47: The 8x8 test tile with a concentric-squares design, seen in Aseprite
the position of the tile you want to change within that layer, and pass that sum as
the second parameter to VDP_loadTileData.
6. Locating the flower tile
The ultimate goal is to animate the flower, not a test square, so you need to find at which
VRAM position the flower’s first tile sits within the foreground. Counting tile by tile directly
on the VRAM debugger is possible, but slow and error-prone, especially if the flower spans
several rows of tiles and each one has to be located separately.
The practical way to solve this is to open the foreground file in Aseprite and turn on tileset
mode (“Tiled”), the same tool already used in chapter 12 to work with complex level maps:
Asepritescanstheimagefromtoptobottomandlefttoright,inexactlythesameorderSGDK
uses, and assigns an index number to each unique tile it finds.
Aseprite’stilesetconfigurationdialog,withthebaseindexsetto1becauseindex0isreserved.
Theflowerismadeupof16distincttiles,arrangedinfourblocksoffourtileseachwithinthe
tileset, without those blocks sitting next to one another. The flower’s first tile, the one in the
top-left corner, turns out to be index number 38 within the foreground’s tileset:
VDP_loadTileData(square_image.tileset->tiles, background_tile_index[1] + 38, 1,
↪ DMA_QUEUE);
7. Reorganizing the tileset so the flower is contiguous
Changingthewholeflower,tilebytile,usingfourseparatecallstoVDP_loadTileData(onefor
each block of four non-contiguous tiles) would work, but it would be awkward to maintain. A
106

=== PAGE 113 ===
Figure 48: Aseprite’s tileset configuration dialog, with the base index set to 1
muchmorepracticalsolutionistoreorganizethetilesetitselfinAseprite,movingtheflower’s
16 tiles so they all sit together, one after another, starting at index 1 (index 0 can’t be used
becauseAsepritereservesit). Thatway,asinglecalltothefunction,withonebaseindexand
16 tiles at once, is enough to change the whole flower.
The flower’s 16 tiles already moved within the Aseprite tileset, grouped and contiguous in-
stead of being spread across four separate blocks.
WhenmovingtileswithinthetilesetinAseprite,it’sbesttomoveseveralatonce,as
long as they’re contiguous with each other, rather than moving them one at a time.
Eachtimeamoveismade,apromptappearsaskingtoconfirmtheremap(“remap”),
whichmustbeacceptedsothatAsepriteupdatesthelevelmap’sreferencestoeach
tile’s new position within the tileset, without altering the map image itself.
ReorganizingthetilesetwithinAsepritehasnoeffectonSGDKbyitself. Uptothispoint, the
project had been letting SGDK generate its own tileset automatically from the foreground
image, the same way Aseprite does: scanning the image and discarding duplicate tiles. For
the new order to carry over into the game, the already-reorganized tileset must be exported
from Aseprite and SGDK made to use it directly, instead of generating its own.
8. Exporting the reorganized tileset and importing it into
SGDK
To export the tileset, Aseprite’s “Export Sprite Sheet” option is used, choosing the Packed
sheet type. As far as SGDK is concerned, there’s no functional difference between exporting
it as one long row or as a more compact grid; Packed is chosen simply because it’s more
convenient to check visually.
Aseprite’s sprite sheet export dialog, with the sheet type set to Packed.
107

=== PAGE 114 ===
Figure 49: The flower’s 16 tiles already moved and grouped within the Aseprite tileset
Figure 50: Aseprite’s sprite sheet export dialog, with the sheet type set to Packed
108

=== PAGE 115 ===
Once exported, the result is a new PNG image with the complete tileset, in the same order it
ended up reorganized into, with the flower’s 16 tiles grouped at the start of the file. Before
saving it, just as in earlier chapters, you need to check that the color mode is Indexed and
that the palette is the correct one.
In SGDK, this exported file is used as the source for the foreground’s tileset instead of gen-
erating it automatically from the map; the level map itself doesn’t change, only the way its
tileset is built. With this change in place, changing the test index from +38 to +1 is enough to
point back to the flower’s first tile, now at a position that’s much simpler to remember and
use:
VDP_loadTileData(square_image.tileset->tiles, background_tile_index[1] + 1, 1,
↪ DMA_QUEUE);
9. Animating the flower with a timer
With the flower’s 16 tiles now contiguous, animating it requires two images: the one already
onthelevelmap(theflower’srestingposition)andasecondimagewiththeflowerinitsother
positionintheanimationcycle,theonethatwillbetransferredtoVRAMwhilethegameruns.
Bothareimportedintoresources.resasimages,notassprites,withthelasttwoparameters
set to NONE.
Figure51: Theflower’ssecondimage,withits16tilesintherotatedpositionoftheanimation
cycle
The flower’s second image, with its 16 tiles in the rotated position of the animation cycle,
ready to be imported into resources.res.
Inthemainloop,VDP_loadTileDataiscalledwiththissecondimage,background_tile_index[1]
+ 1 as the index (the flower’s contiguous position within the foreground), and 16 as the tile
count, since the whole flower is now replaced in one go:
109

=== PAGE 116 ===
VDP_loadTileData(flower1_image.tileset->tiles, background_tile_index[1] + 1, 16,
↪ DMA_QUEUE);
With this single call, the flower immediately switches to its second position, with its tips
oriented vertically and horizontally instead of diagonally, and the change applies equally to
every flower in the level that shares that same tile.
For the animation to alternate on its own, without manual intervention, a timer and a condi-
tionalstructureareneeded. It’sbesttodeclarethecounterasu16insteadof u8: eventhough
inprincipleasmallerrangewouldbeenough,inpracticeit’scommonforacounterthatstarts
smalltoendupneedingmorerangeasthecodegrows,andit’seasytoforgethavingdeclared
it with too tight a type.
u16 timer = 0;
while (TRUE)
{
// ... rest of the game logic, including the per-tile scrolling from chapter 17
↪ ...
if (timer == 60)
{
VDP_loadTileData(flower1_image.tileset->tiles, background_tile_index[1] +
↪ 1, 16, DMA_QUEUE);
}
else if (timer == 120)
{
VDP_loadTileData(flower0_image.tileset->tiles, background_tile_index[1] +
↪ 1, 16, DMA_QUEUE);
timer = 0;
}
timer++;
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
With the timer running inside the main loop, the if / else if pair checks its value: upon
reaching 60 frames (one second, at 60 frames per second), the flower switches to its second
position; upon reaching 120, it goes back to the first and the timer resets to zero. The timer
increment happens at the end of each pass through the loop, after these checks. The result
is the flowers alternating position once per second, continuously, exactly as in the original
level.
10. The risk of ALL compression with duplicate tiles
There’s an easy mistake to make when importing the animation images into resources.res:
usingtheALLcompressionoption, thesameonethatisindeedappropriateforordinaryback-
ground images, instead of NONE. With ALL, SGDK detects that the flower’s second image has
several tiles that are duplicates of each other (the four corners of the 4x4 tile square are left
completelyblank,andarethereforeidenticaltooneanother)andonlyloadsonecopyofeach
unique tile into VRAM, to save space.
The problem is that VDP_loadTileData expects to write exactly 16 distinct tiles, one for each
110

=== PAGE 117 ===
position in the 4x4 block; if SGDK only loaded, say, 12 unique tiles because it dropped the
4 blank duplicates, the function ends up reading tile data that doesn’t correspond to what it
should, and the result on screen ends up visibly broken: the flower appears deformed, with
parts incorrectly repeated.
Figure 52: The result of importing the animation image with ALL compression: the flower
ends up deformed
ThevisualresultofimportingtheanimationimagewithALLcompression: theflowerappears
deformed, with parts incorrectly repeated.
The solution is to use NONE as the compression option for any image that will be used with
VDP_loadTileData in this kind of animation, so that SGDK loads absolutely every tile of the
image into VRAM, including duplicates, and the number of tiles loaded always matches the
numberthefunctionexpects. Thisisalsothereasonwhy,earlierinthischapter,boththetest
tile and the two flower images were imported with NONE instead of ALL.
11. Other uses of this technique and its limits
Timer-drivenanimation,liketheoneinthischapter,isjustoneofthepossibleusesofchanging
VRAMinrealtime. Anothercommonusecaseisverylargelevels,withmoregraphicaldetail
variety than fits at once in the available VRAM: in that scenario, instead of triggering the
change with a timer, it’s best to trigger it based on the player’s position within the level,
discarding tiles that are no longer on screen and loading new tiles in their place, similar
to how chapter 17 shifted map tiles based on scrolling. This is possible with this chapter’s
method,butitrequirescarefulplanningofthetilesetitselfforittoworkwell;theseareVRAM
streaming techniques seen in some Mega Drive homebrew projects for handling levels with
more graphical variety than fits in VRAM at once.
There is one case, however, where this chapter’s technique falls short: individual destruc-
tible blocks. When those blocks are placed on the background layer (a common decision
111

=== PAGE 118 ===
when there are too many of them to handle as sprites, since the Mega Drive can’t display a
largenumberofspritesonscreenwithoutnoticeableflicker),changingaVRAMtilewiththis
chapter’s method affects every instance of that tile at once. That means destroying a single
blockwould,bymistake,destroyeveryidenticalblockinthelevel. Thiscaseneedsadifferent
solution, based on additional VRAM management techniques handled per block rather than
per shared tile; it’s a problem that has already been solved in various Mega Drive homebrew
projects, though it falls outside the scope of this chapter.
Review exercises
1. Explain the difference between VDP_loadTileData and VDP_loadTileSet, and in which
situation each one should be used.
2. Why is it best to store the background’s and foreground’s starting addresses in a ded-
icated array, instead of relying on whatever final value is left in the ind variable after
loading the level?
3. Describe how to use Aseprite’s tileset mode to find the position of a given tile within a
background or a foreground.
4. Why is it worth reorganizing the tileset in Aseprite so that the tiles of an animated ele-
ment, like this chapter’s flower, end up contiguous with each other?
5. Explaininyourownwordswhatproblemarisesfromimportingananimationimagewith
ALL compression instead of NONE, and why that problem doesn’t show up with ordinary
background images.
6. Why isn’t this chapter’s method enough to handle individual destructible blocks placed
on the background layer?
112

=== PAGE 119 ===
Chapter 19 — Complex Level
Maps with Aseprite
Chapters 13 through 16 showed how to build the map for a complete Mega Drive level with
16Tile: a free tool, designed specifically for this hardware, that lets you distribute a back-
ground’s tiles across several palettes and assign them priority relative to sprites. This chap-
terpicksupthosesametwoproblems—multiplepalettesandtilepriority—andaddsanew
one, generating a level collision array, but solves them with a different tool: Aseprite, the
graphics editor already used in Chapter 8 to create this manual’s first graphics.
Thechangeoftoolisnotawhim. 16Tilewasbornasaprojectmeanttocoveraspecificneed
and, although it was made available free of charge to the whole community, it retains the
typical limitations of a purpose-built program without much development time behind it: it
lacks copy and paste, and also undo, inside the map editor. Building a large level tile by tile,
without being able to repeat a piece already made or revert a mistake, turns what should be
mainly creative work into something tedious, and it also discourages experimenting with the
level design, because any change of mind means manually redoing everything already built.
Aseprite,beingacommercialpixelarteditorwithyearsofcontinuousdevelopment,hasnone
of those shortcomings: it offers copy, paste, and undo out of the box, and, since version
1.3 — released in early 2024 — also a native tileset tool, originally designed for indie PC
games. What Aseprite doesn’t include out of the box are Mega Drive-specific features: mul-
tiple palettes within a single tileset, tile priority, and level collision arrays. That gap can be
filled with scripts written in Lua, the scripting language built into Aseprite. Sections 6 and
7 of this chapter describe how a script of this kind would behave, in practice, for assigning
priority and another for generating the collision array, understood as a possible avenue of
automation within the editor and not as a piece of software with a single guaranteed source.
This chapter covers, in order, how to set up an Aseprite canvas as a tileset, how to paint it
while taking advantage of the Mega Drive’s four palettes within a single map, and how to
solve — with the help of Lua scripts — assigning priority to certain tiles and generating the
level’s collision array. By the end, readers will be able to judge, based on the complexity of
their own project, whether it’s worth sticking with 16Tile or switching to this Aseprite-based
workflow.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Aseprite 1.3 or a later version installed: the native tileset tool used in this chapter does
not exist in versions 1.2 or earlier.
• HavingreadChapters13through16,onbuildinglevelmapsandusingmultiplepalettes
and tile priority with 16Tile: this chapter assumes those same concepts are already
113

=== PAGE 120 ===
known, and only changes the tool used to apply them.
• Basic familiarity with Aseprite, covered in Chapter 8: layers, the color palette, and the
difference between indexed color mode and RGB mode.
• Some familiarity with SGDK’s resource compiler (rescomp), in order to interpret the
error message that appears in the section on palette mixing.
You don’t need to know how to program in Lua: the scripts mentioned in this chapter are
described as finished tools, without any need to write them or understand them line by line.
1. From 16Tile to Aseprite: what changes and what doesn’t
The underlying problem with 16Tile isn’t that the final result is worse: ultimately, both tools
producethesamekindoffile,anindexedimagethatSGDKconvertsintoatileset,sotheresult
is equivalent. The problem lies in the process of getting to that result. In a map built tile by
tile, with no way to copy or undo, repeating the same structure — for example, a building
that appears several times throughout a level — requires rebuilding it from scratch every
time, and a misplaced tile that isn’t caught in time can mean losing a good part of an entire
session’s work.
Figure 53: A level map in 16Tile, built tile by tile with no way to copy or undo
A level map assembled in 16Tile: each building was built tile by tile, with no way to copy or
move it as a block.
Two factors explain why it makes sense to solve this same problem with Aseprite. The first
is the release of version 1.3, which introduced a tileset tool designed to separate a map’s
logic (which tile goes in which cell) from a tileset’s logic (what each unique tile looks like),
something that until then only specialized tools like 16Tile or Tiled offered. The second is
the existence of Lua scripts capable of handling, within Aseprite, the two functions it lacks
for working with the Mega Drive: assigning priority to a tile and generating a level collision
array from a finished map.
114

=== PAGE 121 ===
2. Preparing the canvas and converting it into a tileset
The first step is to create a new file in Aseprite in RGB color mode, with a transparent back-
ground. Both the width and the height must be multiples of 16 pixels, not just of 8.
Attention: this requirement only makes sense once you reach section 7 of this
chapter: thecollisionarrayisgeneratedbycopyingthissamemapintoareference
tileset that works in 16×16 pixel blocks. If the canvas dimensions aren’t exact
multiples of 16, that copy ends up misaligned with the collision grid, and the final
result won’t match the actual map.
Withthecanvascreated, it’sagoodideatorenamethedefaultlayer—forexample, tofore-
ground — to distinguish it later from the other layers that will be added. The next step is
to convert that ordinary layer into a tileset layer: right-click on the layer, Convert to, and
Tileset.
That action opens a dialog box with several options. The grid’s width and height should both
be set to 8 pixels, since that’s the size of a Mega Drive tile. The base index decides whether
the first tile in the tileset is counted as number 0 or number 1; it isn’t entirely clear which of
thetwoconventionsAsepriteusesinternallyinthisdialog,soit’sbesttoleaveitatitsdefault
value,verifytheactualbehaviorinpracticebeforerelyingonit,andinanycasenotbaseany
step of the subsequent workflow on this number. Lastly, the two Allowed Flips checkboxes —
horizontal and vertical mirroring — tell Aseprite that, when counting unique tiles, it should
treat two tiles that only differ by being mirrored as the same tile.
Tip: this mirroring setting only affects Aseprite’s internal count of unique tiles
while drawing. When importing the final tileset into SGDK, rescomp does its own
independent mirroring analysis, without taking this checkbox into account.
3. Organizing the palette in index mode: four rows for the
four palettes
The Mega Drive has four hardware palettes — PAL0 through PAL3 — of 16 colors each.
Aseprite’s palette panel, on the other hand, can hold many more than 16 colors at once, so
it’sworthtakingadvantageofthatandorganizingall64possiblecolors(4rowsof16)within
a single panel: from then on, each row represents one of the four hardware palettes.
While defining this organization, it helps to assign each row a base color quite different from
the others — for example, red for the first row, green for the second, blue for the third, and
yellow for the fourth — without worrying yet about the actual colors that will be used in the
final artwork. This trick is just a temporary visual aid: it lets you spot at a glance where one
palette ends and the next begins, and it gets replaced later by the final colors.
The next step is to change the file’s color mode from RGB to Indexed (Sprite, Color Mode,
Indexed). The difference isn’t merely cosmetic: in RGB mode, each pixel stores a pure color
value, with no reference to which palette row it came from; in indexed mode, on the other
hand, each pixel stores the number of the palette slot it uses. That distinction is what makes
itpossible, lateron, toreliablydetectwhetheratilemixescolorsfromtwodifferentpalettes,
even when those two palettes share a visually identical color — black, for example — that
would look indistinguishable at a glance.
Finally, it’s worth creating a second file, separate from the tileset, in RGB mode, with a ref-
erence strip of the tones the Mega Drive reproduces accurately (an informal way to refer to
these tones is to call them “step-32” colors). Rather than typing the tileset’s RGB values by
hand and risking that they don’t match any real console tone, it’s better to copy the exact
colors from that reference file and paste them into the tileset’s indexed palette.
115

=== PAGE 122 ===
Tip: even if the exact colors aren’t copied from a reference file, SGDK automat-
ically adjusts any RGB value to the closest tone the console can reproduce when
importing the resource. The reference file isn’t mandatory: it’s a way to preview,
accurately, within Aseprite, what the colors will actually look like in the game, in-
stead of discovering it only after compiling.
4. Drawing the tileset: the two tile-creation modes
When painting onto a tileset layer, Aseprite offers, in a dropdown menu specific to this type
of layer, different tile-creation modes that change what happens each time you draw over a
tile that already exists on the map.
Inoneofthosemodes,everytimeatileismodified,anew,uniquetileisautomaticallycreated
within the tileset, without altering any other cell on the map that uses the original tile. This
is the recommended mode for adding new pieces to the map.
Theothermodeworkstheoppositeway: ifyoumodifyatilethat’salreadyusedinseveralcells
of the map, the change is applied to all those cells at once, because you’re actually editing
the tile’s shared definition rather than a new copy. This option is especially useful once the
map is practically finished and all that’s needed are small color tweaks to tiles that repeat
many times.
Figure54: Withthechange-propagatingmodeactive,modifyinganexistingtileupdatesevery
map cell that uses it at the same time
Withthechange-propagatingoptionactive,modifyinganexistingtileupdateseverymapcell
that uses it at the same time.
Asepritealsocompareseachnewtileagainsttheonesthatalreadyexist,includingtheirhori-
zontallyandverticallymirroredversions—aslongastheAllowedFlipscheckboxwasenabled
when converting the layer. If it finds a match, it doesn’t create an additional tile: it reuses
thealready-knowntileandmarksthemapcellwithamirrorindicator. HoldingdowntheCtrl
116

=== PAGE 123 ===
key over a tile in the panel reveals these marks: an X next to the index number indicates a
horizontalflip,aYindicatesaverticalflip,andbothletterstogetherindicatethetileisflipped
in both directions.
Tip: if Aseprite’s gray background checkerboard makes it hard to distinguish the
gray tones of the artwork itself, it can be changed from Edit, Preferences, Back-
ground, choosing a different color combination for that background grid.
5. Using several palettes within a single tileset
Withthetilesetalreadyorganizedintofourpaletterows,thenextstepistoactuallydistribute
the map’s tiles across those four palettes, the same way it was already done with simple
backgrounds in earlier chapters, but now on a complete map built by hand in Aseprite. As
an example of how to allocate colors, consider an urban background that needs 6 colors —
including the screen’s overall background color — which leaves 10 free colors in that same
palette to reuse in the foreground.
Reusingacolorbetweenthebackgroundandtheforegroundisn’taprobleminitself—infact,
it’s what allows you to make better use of each palette’s 16 colors — as long as that reused
color doesn’t cause two different elements to visually blend together by ending up adjacent
and the same tone.
Attention: therulethattrulyadmitsnoexceptionsisadifferentone: withinasingle
8×8 pixel tile there can’t be colors coming from two different palette rows. A tile’s
palette attribute is a single value for the whole tile; if its pixels reference colors
from two different rows, the hardware will only honor one of those two palettes
when drawing it, and the tile will look wrong on the console even though it looks
correct in the editor.
This mistake is particularly easy to make, and hard to spot at a glance, when two palettes
share an identical color: for example, if both PAL0 and PAL1 include a pure black, you could
accidentallypaintapixelwithPAL1’sblackinsideatilethatshouldexclusivelyusePAL0,and
the result looks exactly the same on screen while you’re drawing it. A simple way to audit
this is to temporarily fill every color in one palette row with the same eye-catching color —
all green for PAL0, for example — and visually scan the whole map for pixels that haven’t
changed color: any pixel that keeps its original tone reveals that it actually belongs to a
different palette row.
Ifthismistakeisn’tcaughtintimeandyoutrytocompiletheprojectanyway,rescompdetects
it on its own while processing the tileset and halts compilation with a specific error message
that gives the exact pixel coordinates of the conflicting pixel within the image.
rescomp’s error message points to the exact pixel coordinates of the conflicting pixel within
the image.
Tip: that error message, cryptic as it may look at first glance, saves a lot of search
time: just open the tileset image and locate those exact coordinates to find the
misassigned pixel, instead of eyeballing the entire map.
Inatypicalsplitbetweenbackground,foreground,andsprites,palette0canbeusedforboth
the background and part of the foreground, palette 1 reserved exclusively for the rest of the
foreground, and palettes 2 and 3 assigned to different sprite groups — the player’s and the
enemies’, for example. This split highlights an idea already introduced in earlier chapters:
the Mega Drive’s four palettes are a resource shared between backgrounds and sprites, not
a resource exclusive to each one separately.
117

=== PAGE 124 ===
Figure55: rescomperrormessagewhenitdetectsatilewithpixelsfromtwodifferentpalette
rows
6. Assigning tile priority with a Lua script
Chapters 15 and 16 showed what tile priority is — the bit that makes a background tile draw
infrontofspritesinsteadofbehindthem—andhowtoassignitwith16Tile. Asepritehasno
built-in equivalent concept to that priority. That function can be covered by a Lua script that
goes through the tiles marked as priority and applies a recognizable marker to them within
the image itself.
The mechanism such a script would use requires extending the palette: to the four rows of
16colorsthatalreadyrepresentthefourhardwarepalettes,youneedtoaddeightmorerows
of 16 colors each, always in that order and always present, even if the project ends up using
only one or two of the four real palettes. Of those eight new rows, the first four are filler —
their color doesn’t matter, because they won’t be used to paint anything — and the last four
arethepriorityrows,whichbyconvention(andonlyasAseprite’sdefaultcolorwhencreating
a new row) usually appear in pink.
In depth: it isn’t possible to confirm with certainty, from the code, exactly why
twelve palette rows are needed, but the observable behavior is consistent with a
reasonableexplanation: foreachtilemarkedaspriority,thescriptneedssomeway
toleavearecordofthatmarkwithinthefinalimageitself,withoutaddinganydata
outside the graphics file. If the four priority rows reserve a range of color indices
that’s never used for painting directly, the script can use that range as a recog-
nizable signal within the tileset itself. This reading is a reasonable inference from
observed behavior, not a confirmation of how the script actually works internally.
With that palette extension already in place, the workflow for marking tiles as priority, as-
sumingyouhaveaLuascriptinstalledinAseprite’sscriptsfolder(File,Scripts,OpenScripts
Folder,thenFile,Scripts,RescanScriptsFoldersoitshowsupinthelist),wouldbeasfollows:
118

=== PAGE 125 ===
1. Createanewlayerabovethetilesetlayer(New,NewLayer)andrenameit,forexample,
to priority.
2. Inthe tileset layer, withinthe color index panel(not the tilespanel), select the tiles that
should have high priority, copy them with Ctrl+C, and paste them with Ctrl+V onto the
new priority layer: this copies those same tiles, in the same map position, to the new
layer.
3. Saveabackupcopyofthefilein.asepriteformat—withanamelikeforeground_master,
for example — before continuing: the next step is irreversible, and without this backup
there would be no way to change which tiles are priority later on.
4. Convert the tileset layer back into an ordinary layer (right-click, Convert to Layer), be-
cause the script would work on ordinary pixels rather than on the internal structure of
a tileset layer.
5. With the priority layer selected, run the priority script from the File, Scripts menu.
Attention: onlargemaps,ascriptofthiskindcantakeseveralminutestoprocess
allthetiles. It’sbestnottotouchanythingorcloseAsepriteduringthattime, even
if the operating system warns that the process isn’t responding: it’s still working,
and all you need to do is wait.
Once the process finishes, the final steps are: right-click on the priority layer and choose
Merge Down to combine it with the original tileset layer; save the result as a new PNG file,
separatefromthe.asepritebackupcopy;andimportthatPNGintoSGDKwithnoautomatic
tile attribute assignment, the same way it was already done with multiple palettes in earlier
chapters, because both each tile’s palette and its priority have already been determined by
its color within the image itself.
Tip: if the priority script is accidentally run on the original tileset layer instead
of on the priority layer, the effect gets inverted: the tiles that had been marked
as priority become the only ones without priority, and every other tile on the map
becomespriority. It’sworthkeepingthisbehaviorinmind: itcanactuallybefaster
toinvertitonpurposewhenonlyafewtilesneedtoendupwithoutpriority, rather
than manually marking most of the map.
7. Generating the collision array with a second script
Thesameway16Tileletsyouexportalevelcollisionarray,thatsameresultcanbeautomated
within Aseprite with a second Lua script, using a separate reference tileset made of 16×16
pixel tiles instead of 8×8, because this workflow’s collision array operates in 16×16 blocks.
That reference tileset is set up once and reused across all projects: in RGB color mode, it
contains one tile for each type of collision needed — for example, an S for a solid tile, a P for
a platform you can pass through from below but not from above, and additional variants for
slopes — and, in that same file’s palette, a distinct flat color for each of those tiles.
Attention: the order in which the tiles appear within the reference tileset and the
order in which the colors appear within the palette must match exactly: index 0
must be the transparent color and the transparent tile, index 1 the color and tile
for the S, index 2 the color and tile for the P, and so on. A script of this kind would
work by reading, for each 16×16 pixel block of the collision map, only the color of
its top-left pixel, and writing the index number of that color into the output array;
if the order of tiles and colors doesn’t match, the number that gets written won’t
correspond to the collision type that was actually drawn.
With the reference tileset already prepared, the procedure for generating the collision array
of a specific map would be as follows:
119

=== PAGE 126 ===
1. Open the finished map (the tileset layer with the background and foreground result),
select everything within the tiles panel, and copy it with Ctrl+A and Ctrl+C.
2. Open the collision reference tileset and adjust its canvas size (the C button, or Sprite
Size) so it matches exactly the pixel dimensions of the copied map.
3. Paste the copy (Ctrl+V) onto a new layer, as a visual guide, and paint onto a separate
collision layer the S, P, or slope tiles that correspond to each area of the level, using
that background copy as a guide to know where there’s ground, platforms, or elevation
changes.
4. Save a backup copy of the file before continuing, for the same reason as in the previous
section: the script step would be irreversible.
5. Delete the guide layer (the copy of the original map), leaving only the collision layer
visible, and change the file’s color mode to Indexed.
6. Run the collision script from the File, Scripts menu, and when prompted, provide an
output file name with the .txt extension.
The resulting text file would contain a declaration ready to paste directly into the code: a
const u8arraywithonenumberforeach16×16blockofthemap,and,attheend,aconstant
with the total length of that array, already calculated.
Tip: it’s worth checking whether there’s a trailing comma after the array’s last
number before pasting it into the code: the compiler generally tolerates it anyway,
but it’s a two-second check.
The result would be equivalent, in form and in index logic, to a collision array built by hand
with 16Tile: a linear array of unsigned 8-bit integers, with a fixed row width and one value
per collision tile. The logic for converting pixel coordinates into indices of that array, and
for interpreting each numeric value according to the collision type it represents, is the same
regardless of whether the array was built by hand or generated with a script.
8. When this workflow is worth it compared to 16Tile
Adopting this workflow has a real organizational cost: you have to set up the palette with a
specific row structure from the start, save a backup copy before every irreversible step, and
dependonLuascriptsthataren’tpartofeitherAsepriteorSGDK.Inexchange, yougetback
everything 16Tile doesn’t offer: copy and paste, undo, and generally, a more comfortable
editor for iterating on a level’s design.
Thisworkflowpaysoffmorethebiggerandmorechangeablethelevelis: aprojectwithmany
large levels, or with a design that’s still in a trial-and-error stage, benefits from being able
to copy repeated structures and undo mistakes without redoing work. For simpler projects,
there’s no need to feel obligated to add this complexity if 16Tile is enough for the size of
the level being built: it’s better to save the more elaborate techniques for when the project
actually needs them, rather than adopting them ahead of time just because they’re available.
Review exercises
1. List at least two concrete limitations of 16Tile that motivate considering a switch to
Aseprite, and explain why those limitations don’t affect a commercial pixel art editor in
the same way.
2. Explain why a tileset canvas must be created with dimensions that are multiples of 16,
notjustof8,takingintoaccounthowthatsameimageisusedinthesectiononcollision.
3. DescribethedifferencebetweenAseprite’stwotile-creationmodes,andwhateffecteach
one has when modifying a tile that’s already used several times on the map.
120

=== PAGE 127 ===
4. Why is it necessary to work in indexed color mode, rather than RGB mode, in order to
reliably detect an accidental mix of palettes within a single tile?
5. Explain, in your own words, why a tile priority script would need more palette rows
thanthefouralreadyusedbynormaltiles, andwhatspecialprecautionshouldbetaken
before running it.
121

=== PAGE 128 ===
Chapter 20 — Converting
Many-Color Images to the Mega
Drive Palette
Reducing a high-color-range illustration to the console’s four 16-color palettes through tile-
based quantization
All the previous chapters in this part of the manual started from a comfortable premise: the
sourcegraphicwasalreadydesignedwiththeMegaDriveinmind,drawnbyhandinaneditor
with an indexed color mode, with the 16-color-per-palette limit taken into account from the
very first stroke. This chapter closes out the part of the manual devoted to backgrounds,
tiles, palettes, and scrolling by tackling the reverse problem — one that’s considerably more
common than it might seem: what to do when the starting image wasn’t designed for the
console at all. A digital illustration, a render, or a screenshot from a modern game can have
thousandsofdistinctcolors, farbeyondthe61theMegaDrivecandisplayonscreenatonce.
Manuallyconvertingsuchanimage,colorbycolor,ispossiblebutextremelyslow;thischapter
presents an automated technique that reduces that work to a process of minutes, along with
its limits, which are worth knowing before relying on it for any kind of graphic.
TheexampleusedthroughoutthechapterisaSonicillustrationwithacolorrangefarbeyond
whattheconsolecanreproduce, treatedasifitweretheartworkforatitlescreenoracover.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, you should be clear on:
• Theconceptofanindexedpalette,thelimitoffour16-colorpalettes(PAL0throughPAL3),
and the idea that a tile doesn’t store color but rather an index into a palette, covered in
Chapter 2.
• Working with a graphics editor in indexed color mode — Aseprite or an equivalent —
including the use of a reference grid and an eyedropper-type tool to inspect the color
index of a specific pixel, covered in Chapter 8.
1. The problem: from an arbitrary color range to four
palettes per tile
Thealready-familiarrestrictionontheMegaDriveisthatanygraphiconscreenisbuiltfrom
8×8-pixel tiles, and each tile is assigned a single palette out of the four available. When a
graphicisdrawnfromscratchwiththeconsoleinmind,thatrestrictionisnaturallyrespected,
tile by tile, as the drawing progresses. The problem arises when the image already exists,
122

=== PAGE 129 ===
comes from another source, and has far more colors than any combination of four palettes
can represent.
Reducing that image by hand — choosing which 61 colors to keep and manually remapping
everypixel—isfeasibleforasmallillustration,butbecomesimpracticalasthesizeanddetail
of the graphic grow. The automated alternative is to use a color quantization algorithm that,
in addition to reducing the total number of colors, understands the Mega Drive’s particular
constraint: that the reduction isn’t done over the whole image as if it were a single palette,
but tile by tile, letting each 8×8 block use whichever of the four available palettes suits it
best. There are community tools, such as tile-based palette quantization generators, built
specificallyforthisproblem;theyusuallyrundirectlyinthebrowser,withnoinstallation,and
accept a plain PNG image as input. Since these are free projects maintained by hobbyists,
their exact name, address, or availability may change over time, so it’s worth searching for
whateveroptioniscurrentwhenyouneeditratherthanrelyingonafixedlink; whatmatters
here is understanding the parameters this kind of tool exposes and what each one means,
since they’re common to any implementation of the same problem.
2. Preparing the source image: canvas size, not image size
The first step, before touching any quantization tool, is to adjust the resolution of the source
image to the console’s screen size. In the graphics editor this is done through the canvas
sizeoption,nottheimagesizeorspritesizeoption: thelatterrescalesthecontent,distorting
or blurring the original drawing, whereas a canvas size change simply crops or adds space
around it without touching the existing pixels.
Thewidthissetto320pixels. Iftheaspectratioislocked,theresultingheightwouldbe240,
appropriate for a PAL project; for an NTSC project, that height should be manually adjusted
to 224. Since this is a canvas change rather than a scaling operation, the result crops a strip
off the original image (typically from the top and bottom) instead of distorting it, which is
usually preferable to losing proportions in a graphic that’s later going to be shown at actual
size.
Adjustingthecanvassizeto320pixelswide,withtheaspectratiostilllockedbeforemanually
correcting the height.
The color mode of the image at this point doesn’t matter much, because the quantization
tool used next accepts both RGB images and already-indexed ones. It’s enough to save the
cropped image as a regular PNG file.
3. Tile quantization parameters
Once the prepared image is loaded into the quantization tool, there’s a set of parameters
that define how the available color is going to be distributed. Although the exact name of
each field can vary depending on the specific implementation, the concepts behind them are
always the same and apply to any equivalent tool:
• Tile size: left at 8×8, which is the Mega Drive VDP’s native tile size. Any other value
wouldn’t make sense for this console.
• Number of palettes: 1 to 4 on the Mega Drive. When the image is going to be used
in isolation, such as a title screen with no other graphics sharing a palette with it, it’s
worthtakingadvantageofallfourfullpalettestomaximizetheamountofavailablecolor.
Iftheimageisgoingtocoexistwithothergraphics(enemysprites,itemcards,etc.) that
needtheirownpalettes,fewershouldbereserved—two,forexample—leavingtherest
for those other elements.
123

=== PAGE 130 ===
Figure 56: Adjusting the canvas size to 320 px wide
• Colors per palette: 16, the maximum the hardware supports.
• Bitsperchannel: 3,thecorrectvaluefortheMegaDrive,whichreproduces8intensity
levels per RGB channel (the same 9 total bits per color seen in Chapter 2). Other 8-bit
and16-bitsystemsusedifferentvaluesinthissametypeoftool—morebitsperchannel
onconsoleswithgreatercolordepth,feweronmorelimitedones—soit’sworthmaking
sure this is specifically configured for the Mega Drive and not for another system.
• Index-0 color behavior: determines what happens to the firstcolor of each of the four
palettes. If the graphic is a sprite or any element with transparency, it’s best to use the
transparentcoloroption(usuallyrepresentedasmagenta),makingsurethebackground
oftheoriginalimageisalsomagenta. If,instead,it’sanisolatedbackgroundimagewith
no need for transparency, it’s best to use the shared color option set to black: that way
index 0 matches across all four palettes, that black can be reused within the drawing
itself, and in practice you end up with 61 usable colors instead of 60.
• Sampled pixel fraction: controls how long the algorithm takes to produce the result.
Higher values are slower but, in theory, produce a more accurate quantization; in prac-
tice, the difference between a low value (0.1) and the maximum (1.0) is usually much
smaller than expected, so it’s best to start with a low value and raise it only if the result
isn’t convincing.
TheparametersalreadyadjustedforMegaDrive: 4palettes,16colorsperpalette,and3bits
per channel.
Besides these parameters, this kind of tool usually offers dithering options to smooth the
transition between colors when their count is reduced. It’s worth turning these on when
working with an isolated image, although the exact difference between the variants typically
offered — usually described as a “slow” mode and a “fast” mode — is best explored by trying
eachonedirectlyontheimageitself,ratherthanmemorizingafixedrule: theresultdepends
too much on the particular graphic content to generalize. What is fairly consistent across
implementations is that a lower dithering weight produces a subtler effect and a higher one
124

=== PAGE 131 ===
Figure 57: Quantization parameters configured for Mega Drive
intensifies it, and that different dithering patterns are usually offered (diagonal, horizontal,
vertical, in 2- or 4-color variants) which are also worth comparing visually before settling on
one.
4. Generating and downloading the quantized image
With the parameters set, the quantization is run. With a low pixel-fraction value the process
is usually done in seconds; with higher values it can take longer, but in any case it’s a matter
of minutes, not hours, even on full-screen images.
The result is shown together with the generated palettes: in the example with four full
palettes, four rows of 16 colors each, with the shared color (black, in this case) as the first
colorinallfour. Theresultingimagecanbedownloadedanduseddirectly: theproducedfile
is usually imported into SGDK without any additional conversion step, even if the tool out-
puts a BMP instead of a PNG, since SGDK’s resource compiler accepts both formats without
distinction.
The already-quantized image together with the four resulting palettes, with the shared black
as the first color of each.
5. Inspecting the result in the graphics editor
When opening the downloaded file in the graphics editor, it’s essential to confirm that the
colormodestaysindexedandnotswitchittoRGBoranyothermodeunderanycircumstances:
doing so would destroy the per-tile palette assignment the tool just built.
The result of this kind of quantization is usually quite satisfactory for an isolated illustration
like the one used as an example, although there are almost always specific spots — high-
125

=== PAGE 132 ===
Figure 58: Quantized image together with its four generated palettes
contrast areas or ones with very fine color transitions, like a character’s eyes — where the
seam between neighboring tiles, each with its own assigned palette, is more clearly notice-
able.
A close-up of the eye area, where the seam between neighboring tile palettes is more clearly
noticeable.
In the editor’s palette panel you can clearly see the structure of four rows of 16 colors, with
thesharedcolorasthefirstcolorofeach;whateverotherblacksmightappearafterthatfirst
color simply go unused and don’t need to be removed. Each 8×8-pixel tile in the image is
assigned a single one of the four palettes (PAL0 through PAL3), so that the image as a whole
makes use of all four palettes available on the console.
6. The rule that can’t be broken: one tile, one palette
Beforemanuallytouchingupanyalready-quantizedimage,there’sarestrictionthatneedsto
be kept in mind at all times: within a single 8×8 tile, colors from two different palettes can’t
be mixed. If that happens, SGDK’s resource compiler can’t resolve a single palette for that
tile and halts compilation with an error.
Tocheckwhichpaletteagivencolorbelongsto,mosteditorsletyouinspecttheexactindexof
a pixel with a modifier-key-plus-click combination (Alt+click, for example), which highlights
the exact row and position of that color in the palette panel. This is especially useful before
manuallypaintingoveraquantizedimage: ifyouaddacolorthatbelongstoadifferentpalette
rowthantherestofthetileisalreadyusing,youunknowinglyintroduceapaletteconflictthat
will only show up as an error once you compile.
When you need to visually combine elements that in practice belong to different
palettes—forexample,aforegrounddetailwithitsownpaletteoverabackground
126

=== PAGE 133 ===
Figure 59: Seam between different tile palettes in the eye area
withitsown—thesolutionisn’ttoforcethemintothesametile,buttooverlaytwo
independent background images, each with its own palette assignment.
An effective way to visually verify that no tile mixes palettes is to temporarily replace, in the
editoritself,allthecolorsofeachofthefourpaletteswithasingle,clearlydistinguishableflat
tone. Theresultisanimagereducedtofoursolidcolors,whereeachuniformlycoloredregion
of tiles corresponds exactly to one palette: any mixing between palettes would immediately
show up as an irregular pattern within a single region, instead of clean blocks.
The full image with the four palettes each reduced to a flat color, showing that no tile mixes
colors from more than one palette.
7. Manual touch-up: polishing the problem areas
Mostimagesquantizedthiswayaregoingtoneedsomedegreeofmanualtouch-up,especially
in high-contrast or fine-detail areas where the algorithm has less room to accommodate the
available color. How much time is worth investing in that polishing is up to whoever is doing
it: automatic quantization handles most of the work, but rarely one hundred percent of it.
A practical technique for deciding whether to merge or replace a color is, before making
the final call, to temporarily change it to a very bold tone quite different from the rest of
the image — an intense yellow, for example. That immediately reveals exactly where in the
image that color is used, information that’s otherwise hard to appreciate when the color in
question is very similar to another nearby one in the same palette. Once you’ve confirmed
the replacement doesn’t cause any noticeable loss, the final color is applied.
The problem color recolored in intense yellow, to spot at a glance where it appears before
deciding on its replacement.
After replacing a color, there can still be a somewhat abrupt transition between two tones
127

=== PAGE 134 ===
Figure 60: Each palette reduced to a flat color, with no mixing between tiles
Figure 61: Problem color temporarily recolored in intense yellow
128

=== PAGE 135 ===
within the same tile; in those cases, adding manual dithering — alternating pixels of both
colors in a regular pattern — can smooth out the edge, always respecting the rule from the
previoussection: anycoloraddedbyhandhastobelongtothesamepaletteastherestofthe
tile it’s drawn in.
8. Integrating the converted image into SGDK
Once you’re satisfied with the result, the already-quantized image is integrated into the
projectexactlylikeanyotherIMAGEresource, withonedifferencefromthebasicflowseenin
Chapter 7: since the image carries four full palettes generated by the external tool, instead
of loading them directly with PAL_setPalette(), it’s better to apply them with a fade-in, to
avoid the image suddenly appearing with all its colors in the very first frame.
In resources.res:
IMAGE quantized_bg "sonic_quantized.bmp" NONE
And in main.c:
#include <genesis.h>
#include "resources.h"
int main(bool hardReset)
{
u16 palette[64];
// All colors set to black before drawing, so the
// image doesn't suddenly appear with its real colors
PAL_setColors(0, palette_black, 64, CPU);
// Draw the already-quantized image, using all four palettes
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_A, &quantized_bg,
TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, TILE_USER_INDEX),
0, 0, FALSE, TRUE);
// Copy to RAM the four real palettes carried by the image
memcpy(palette, quantized_bg.palette->data, 64 * sizeof(u16));
// And apply them with a smooth fade-in
PAL_fadeIn(0, 63, palette, 100, TRUE);
while (TRUE)
{
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return 0;
}
Thepatternisalwaysthesame: setall64colorslotstoblackwithPAL_setColors(),drawthe
image with VDP_drawImageEx() (which internally already associates each tile with its corre-
sponding palette, as defined during quantization), copy the four real palettes carried by the
importedresourceintoanarrayinRAM,andapplythosepalettesgraduallywithPAL_fadeIn()
insteadofanabruptjump. Thissamefadingtechnique—settingeverythingtoblackandthen
129

=== PAGE 136 ===
bringing up the real palette progressively — can be reused in any other screen transition in
the game, not just in the image conversion covered in this chapter.
Oncecompiled,theROMfaithfullyreproducestheoriginalillustrationalreadyreducedtothe
MegaDrive’sfourpalettes,withasmoothfade-intransition. Theresultisremarkablerelative
to how little time it takes to get there, compared to a fully manual color reduction.
Figure 62: The converted Sonic illustration, running in an emulator
Thefinalresultintheemulator: theSonicillustrationalreadyreducedtothefourMegaDrive
palettes, with the fade-in applied.
9. The limits of the technique
The example worked through in this chapter — an isolated illustration used as a title screen,
withallfourfullpalettesavailablejustforit—isthescenariowherethistechniqueperforms
best. The situation changes quite a bit when the graphic being converted is a playable-level
background that has to coexist with other elements: if only two of the four palettes can be
reserved for the background — leaving the other two for, say, enemy sprites and interface
elements—theresultoftheautomaticquantizationtendstolooknoticeablypoorerandmore
“washed out” than in the case of an image that has all four full palettes at its disposal. This
is especially noticeable in highly detailed art styles, with many color nuances and smooth
transitions — the kind of graphic you might see in an exploration-heavy platformer with a lot
ofenvironmentaldetail—wherehalftheavailablecolorcapacityisn’tenoughtopreservethe
visual richness of the original.
This automatic quantization works very well as a starting point and as a complete solution
for fixed, isolated graphics — covers, title screens, standalone illustrations — but it doesn’t
replacehand-donecolorreductionworkwhenthegraphicishighlydetailedandhastoshare
palettes with other elements in the game. In those cases, the most realistic approach is to
treat automatic quantization as a rough first draft and assume that a good part of the color
130

=== PAGE 137 ===
adjustment is going to end up being done by hand, tile by tile, with the same care you’d take
drawing a graphic designed for the console from the very start.
IntheMegaDrivehomebrewdevelopmentcommunity,thereareexperimentsfloatingaround
that take this same idea of tile-based quantization to full video sequences, frame by frame,
to achieve something resembling full-motion video (FMV) playable on the console, making
use of up to 61 colors per frame. It’s more a demonstration of the method’s possibilities
thana techniquein everydayuse: an actualvideo-playback projecton the MegaDrive would
probably also need additional hardware, such as the Mega CD add-on, to handle the data
volume and read speed that kind of content demands.
This chapter closes out the part of the manual devoted to backgrounds, tiles, palettes, and
scrolling. Thenextpartpicksbackupwithspritesandtheiranimation, buildingonthesame
vocabulary of tile, palette, and color index covered so far.
Review exercises
1. Explain the difference between adjusting the canvas size and adjusting the image or
sprite size when preparing a source illustration for this technique, and why the former
option is chosen.
2. Describe the number-of-palettes, colors-per-palette, and bits-per-channel parameters of
a tile quantization tool, and state the correct values for the Mega Drive and why.
3. What’sthedifferencebetweenchoosingasharedcolorandatransparentcolorforindex
0 of each palette, and for which type of graphic — background or sprite — would each
option be preferable?
4. Explain the fundamental rule that has to be respected within each 8×8 tile when manu-
ally touching up an already-quantized image, and what happens in SGDK if it’s broken.
5. Based on the contrast between converting an isolated illustration with all four full
palettes available and converting a level background that can only use two, explain
which type of content this technique performs best on and which requires more
additional manual work.
131

=== PAGE 138 ===
Chapter 21 — How to Display
Sprites
SGDK’s sprite engine, pixel coordinates, and automatic VRAM allocation
The previous chapters dealt entirely with background planes: how to display them, how to
scroll them, and how to draw them while respecting the hardware’s rules. Planes build the
game’s stage, but not what the player controls or what they play against. That role belongs
to sprites: the character that moves through the world, the enemies, the projectiles, any
graphical element that animates or moves independently of the background. This chapter
opens Part III by showing how to put a first sprite on screen, and along the way there turn
out to be as many similarities as differences compared to the background pipeline already
familiar to us.
Chapter 2 already introduced, at a conceptual level, the hardware behind sprites: their own
control table in VRAM (the Sprite Attribute Table, or SAT), independent of the planes’ name
tables; the 32×32-pixel size limit per hardware sprite, combining up to 4×4 tiles; and the
simultaneous limits depending on the resolution mode (80 sprites on screen and 20 per line
in H40; 64 and 16 in H32). That vocabulary is taken as known here; this chapter deals with
the code needed to put an actual sprite on screen.
Thespriteusedasanexampleinthischapteristakenasalreadyprepared,withoutrepeating
thecreationprocesscoveredinchapter8. Everythingsaidtherestillapplies: aspriteis,first
andforemost,agraphic,andassuchithastorespectthesize-multiple-of-8rule,the16-color-
per-palette limit, and the indexed PNG format. What this chapter adds is the other half of
thejob: howtodeclarethatfileasaresourceofadifferenttypethanabackground,andhow
to put it on screen through an SGDK mechanism completely separate from the one used for
planes, the sprite engine.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Completed chapter 7, “How to Display Backgrounds on the Mega Drive”: the resource
pipeline, the three sections of main(), PAL_setPalette(), and the concept of a palette
(PAL0 through PAL3) are taken as known.
• Completed, or at least reviewed, chapter 8, “Creating Graphics with Aseprite”: a sprite
is just another graphic, subject to the same size and palette rules.
• Anunderstandingofthespritehardwarepresentedinchapter2: theSAT,themaximum
size of 32×32 pixels per sprite, and the simultaneous quantity limits depending on the
resolution mode.
• AbaseSGDKproject,eitheremptyorbuiltfromoneoftheexamplesinpreviouschapters,
with a sprite PNG file already copied into the res folder.
132

=== PAGE 139 ===
1. The SPRITE Resource: What Sets It Apart from an IM-
AGE
LoadingaspriteintotheROMstarts,justaswithabackground,bycopyingthePNGfileinto
the res folder and declaring it in resources.res. But the directive is different: instead of
IMAGE, SPRITE is used, and its list of fields is longer.
SPRITE our_sprite "sonic.png" 6 6 FAST 0
Thefirsttwofields,thenametheCcodewilluse(our_sprite,inthisexample)andthepathto
thePNGfile,playthesameroleasinanIMAGE.Thethirdandfourthfields,ontheotherhand,
havenoequivalentthere: youhavetoexplicitlyspecifythewidthandheightofasinglesprite
frame, in tiles (6 and 6, in this case: a 48×48-pixel sprite). The reason for this difference
is picked up in detail in chapter 22, dedicated to creating animation sheets: a single sprite
file can contain several frames laid out side by side, and SGDK needs to know the size of an
individual frame in order to be able to separate them. With a static, single-frame sprite like
the one in this example, that size matches the size of the entire image.
The fifth field is, again, compression, with the same options as for an IMAGE — NONE, FAST,
and BEST — but with an additional consideration that is specific to sprites. NONE compresses
nothing;FASTprioritizesfastdecompressionatthecostoflessspacesavings;andBESToffers
thebiggestsavings, butdemandsmoreCPUworktodecompresseverytimethedataisused.
BEST corresponds, in the rescomp documentation, to the algorithm identified as APLIB; in re-
centversionsofSGDKthesamewordmayinsteadindicateanautomaticselectionofthemost
convenientalgorithmforeachresource. It’sworthconfirmingwhichofthetwobehaviorsap-
plies in the installed version before assuming that BEST always means the most aggressive,
and slowest, compression.
That distinction in decompression speed matters far more for a sprite than for a background.
Abackground,oncedrawn,normallystaysthesameinVRAMforagoodpartofthegame;the
cost of decompressing it is paid only once. An animated sprite, on the other hand, changes
frames several times per second, and each frame change can involve decompressing data
againanduploadingittoVRAM.Theeffectismeasurable: inaprojectwithseveralanimated
charactersonscreenatonce,changingtheirsprites’compressionfromFASTtoBESTcancause
a noticeable drop in frames per second, to the point of making the game perceptibly slower.
Fast compression for anything that animates often. The practical takeaway
is to prefer FAST for sprites that animate frequently, and to reserve BEST for data
that loads only once, like backgrounds. The alternative (loading every possible
animation frame into VRAM up front, so nothing needs to be decompressed during
gameplay) is also valid, but has the opposite cost: that VRAM space is no longer
availableforanythingelse,suchasmorebackgroundtiles. It’satrade-offbetween
space and speed, not a one-size-fits-all answer.
The last field on the line, left at 0 in this example, is the animation timing: how many frames
each animation frame lasts before moving on to the next one. At 0, automatic animation is
disabled,whichisexactlywhat’sexpectedforasingle-framespriteliketheoneinthischapter;
chapter 23, dedicated to animating sprites, returns to this field in detail.
2. The Three Sections of main() Again, and a Sprite That’s
a Pointer
With the resource already declared, it’s necessary, as with any resource, to include re-
sources.h in main.c so the code can refer to it by name. From there, the same three-section
133

=== PAGE 140 ===
organization used in chapter 9, on scroll and parallax scrolling, applies again: a global sec-
tion,beforeint main(),foranythingthatneedstoexistfortheentirelifetimeoftheprogram;
an initial setup section, between the opening of main() and the while(1), for anything that
runs exactly once; and the main loop, inside the while(1), for anything that repeats every
frame.
The first declaration in this chapter goes in the global section, and has a different form from
any variable used so far:
Sprite *player;
TheasteriskindicatesthatplayerisnotitselfaSprite,butapointer: avariablethat,instead
of storing a value, stores the memory address where another piece of data lives. The reason
forthisdesignbecomesclearerlookingahead: asshowninsection5,thefunctionthataddsa
spritetothescene(SPR_addSprite())doesn’tcreateanindependentcopyforthegamecode,
but instead returns a pointer to the Sprite that SGDK’s own sprite engine keeps managing
internallyframebyframe. Storingthatpointer,ratherthanavalueofitsown,iswhatletsthe
code, in later chapters, keep referring to this particular sprite in order to move it, animate
it, or query its state, without having to look it up again each time. For now, it’s enough to
follow the recipe: Sprite, asterisk, a name of your choosing (player, in this example, though
it could be called anything else), and a semicolon.
3. Initializing the Sprite Engine: SPR_init()
The sprite engine is the part of SGDK responsible for managing all active sprites at once:
which VRAM they’ve been allocated, what screen position they’re at, with what attributes,
and how to pack all that information into the format the VDP’s sprite hardware expects at
every vertical blank (VBlank). Before adding the first sprite, that engine has to be initialized,
and this is done exactly once, in the initial setup section, with SPR_init():
SPR_init();
Since SGDK 1.4 (May 2019), SPR_init() takes no parameters at all: internally it reserves
the maximum available number of sprites without needing to be told to. If older code or
documentation turns up calling it with three arguments (SPR_init(0, 0, 0), for example),
thatformstillexistsforbackwardcompatibilityunderadifferentname,SPR_initEx(),butit’s
nolongertherecommendedformfornewcode: SPR_init()withnoargumentsisthecurrent
form, and the one used throughout the rest of this manual.
There’s a more fundamental point beyond the difference in form: no other sprite function
— not PAL_setPalette() for the sprite’s palette, not SPR_addSprite(), not SPR_update() —
has any way of warning you that it’s failing because the engine isn’t ready. The symptom of
forgettingthiscallis,atbest,thatnothingappearsonscreen,withnoerrormessagepointing
to the real problem. Treat this line as non-negotiable in any project that uses sprites.
4. Assigning the Sprite’s Palette: The Same Function, a
Different Data Source
With the engine initialized, the next step is exactly the same function used for backgrounds
in chapter 7: PAL_setPalette(). The only thing that changes is where the color information
comes from.
PAL_setPalette(PAL2, our_sprite.palette->data, DMA);
134

=== PAGE 141 ===
our_sprite.palette->data pulls the color information directly from the structure rescomp
generated when processing the SPRITE resource, the same way bg1.palette->data pulled
it from an IMAGE resource in chapter 7. The palette number chosen, PAL2, reflects an or-
ganizational convention here rather than a hardware rule: reserving PAL0 and PAL1 for the
background and foreground planes, and PAL2 and PAL3 for the player-controlled character
andforenemies,respectively. TheVDPdoesn’tassignanyspecialmeaningtoanyofthefour
palettes; it’s simply a criterion worth keeping consistent within a given project so as not to
lose track of things.
5. Adding the Sprite to the Scene: SPR_addSprite() and
Automatic VRAM Allocation
This is where a sprite’s workflow starts to diverge clearly from that of a background. To
display a background, chapter 7 needed a global variable (ind) to manually keep track of
which VRAM position belonged to each image, incremented by hand after every call to
VDP_drawImageEx(). For a sprite, that bookkeeping work isn’t necessary: the sprite engine
handles it on its own.
player = SPR_addSprite(&our_sprite, 0, 0, TILE_ATTR(PAL2, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
The first argument, &our_sprite, is the address of the sprite definition structure generated
from the SPRITE resource (hence the & symbol, “address of”). The next two, x and y, are the
sprite’s initial position on screen, with an important difference from VDP_drawImageEx() that
is picked up again in section 7. The fourth argument is the sprite’s attribute, built with a
different macro than the one used for backgrounds:
u16 TILE_ATTR(u16 pal, u16 prio, u16 flipV, u16 flipH);
TILE_ATTR()takesthesamefirstfourparametersasTILE_ATTR_FULL(),seeninchapter7for
drawingbackgrounds—thatis,palette,priority,verticalflip,andhorizontalflip—but,unlike
thatone,itdoesn’ttakeaVRAMindexatall. Thatabsenceisn’tanoversight: it’stheflipside
oftheautomaticresourceallocationthatSPR_addSprite()offersbydefault. Thespriteengine
decides on its own which VRAM position each sprite goes into, and it does so dynamically as
sprites are added, removed, or change animation frame; the programmer doesn’t have to
reserve or keep track of anything, unlike the manual discipline with TILE_USERINDEX that
backgroundsrequired. SGDKdoesofferafunction,SPR_setVRAMTileIndex(),tosetasprite’s
VRAMpositionbyhandincaseswherethatfine-grainedcontrolisneeded,buttheautomatic
behavior is the one used by default and is more than enough for practically any introductory
case like this one.
With this line, the sprite is added to the scene, and its pointer, returned by SPR_addSprite(),
isstoredinplayer,thevariabledeclaredinsection2. Onelaststepisstillneeded,insidethe
main loop, for the sprite to actually appear correctly on screen.
6. Updating Sprites Frame by Frame: SPR_update()
Unlikeabackgroundplane,which,oncedrawnwithVDP_drawImageEx(),staysonscreenwith-
out needing any further instruction in the main loop, sprites need the engine to update them
everyframe. ThefunctioninchargeofthisisSPR_update(),andit’scalledwithnoarguments
inside the while(1):
while(1)
{
135

=== PAGE 142 ===
SPR_update();
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
SPR_update() walks the internal list of active sprites, computes their updated state (position,
animation frame if applicable, VRAM priority), and prepares that information into a list that
getssenttotheVDPduringthenextverticalblank. Omittingthiscalldoesn’tstoptheprogram
fromcompilingorrunning,butspritesaddedwithSPR_addSprite()neveractuallygetshown
or updated on screen: the engine keeps managing them behind the scenes, but never gets
around to telling the hardware any of it.
7. Compiling and Experimenting: Pixels, Not Tiles, and the
Flip Flags
With all six pieces now in place (resources.res with the SPRITE resource, the resources.h
include,theplayerpointer,SPR_init(),PAL_setPalette(),andSPR_addSprite()intheinitial
setup, and SPR_update() in the loop), saving both files and recompiling the project already
shows the sprite on screen, at position (0, 0), the top-left corner.
Agoodfirstexperimentistochangethesprite’sinitialpositionandobservetheresult. Chang-
ing x and y from (0, 0) to (10, 10) only shifts the sprite a little to the right and down. This
small a shift isn’t a coincidence: unlike the x and y coordinates of VDP_drawImageEx(), which
inchapter7weremeasuredintiles(avalueof5shiftedtheimage40pixels),thecoordinates
of SPR_addSprite() are measured directly in pixels. A value of 10 moves the sprite 10 pixels,
not 10 tiles (80 pixels); to get a shift visually comparable to that of a background plane, a
considerably larger number is needed, such as 100.
Tiles for planes, pixels for sprites. This difference in units between the two
functions isn’t a whim or an inconsistency in SGDK: it has to do with the fact that
sprites, unlike planes, move freely pixel by pixel across the whole screen (which is
why the Mega Drive’s own sprite hardware positions them in pixel units), whereas
a background plane, even though it can scroll in pixels (as seen in chapter 9), is
initially drawn tile by tile. Keep firmly in mind which of the two units applies to
each function: mixing them up produces sprites that barely move or backgrounds
that jump abruptly.
Thelasttwoparametersof TILE_ATTR(),flipVandflipH,letyouflipthespritewithoutneed-
ing another image file or any additional function. Changing flipV to TRUE flips the sprite
vertically, upsidedown; changing flipH to TRUE flipsit horizontally, facing theopposite direc-
tionfromtheoriginal. Placedsidebyside,theeffectiseasytopicture: thestandingsilhouette
exactly as it is in the PNG, that same silhouette flipped top to bottom with flipV, and that
same silhouette facing the opposite way with flipH, without any of the three variants requir-
ing a second sprite to be loaded or anything new to be drawn. It’s the usual way of handling,
for example, a character changing direction while walking.
The first parameter of TILE_ATTR(), priority, works the same way as seen in chapter 7 for
planes: by default, the Mega Drive’s drawing order goes from the background plane (BG_B)
at the back, the foreground plane (BG_A) in the middle, and sprites in front of everything.
Marking a sprite with high priority doesn’t change that overall order relative to the planes
(sprites are already drawn in front), but if the foreground plane is also marked with high
priority,asexplainedinchapter15whendiscussingdepththroughtilepriority,thatplanecan
end up being drawn in front of the sprite in the relevant areas. It’s the same tool that allows,
for example, a character to appear behind a lamppost or a tree trunk in certain columns of
the screen and in front of it in others.
136

=== PAGE 143 ===
Review exercises
1. Explain in your own words what each of the fields in a SPRITE line in resources.res is
for, and how it differs from the equivalent field in an IMAGE line.
2. Ateammatenoticesthattheirgame,verysmoothduringtheearlytests,startsdropping
framespersecondassoonastheyaddanimationstoseveralcharactersonscreen. They
checktheirresources.resandfindthatalloftheirspritesuseBESTcompression. Explain
why this is a reasonable suspect and what change you would try first.
3. WhyisplayerdeclaredasSprite *playerandnotsimplyasSprite player? Relateyour
answer to what SPR_addSprite() returns.
4. A sprite is added with SPR_addSprite(&our_sprite, 5, 5, TILE_ATTR(PAL2, FALSE,
FALSE, FALSE)) and doesn’t appear on screen at all, even though the code compiles
withouterrors. Listatleasttwodistinctpossiblecauses,relatedtothefunctionscovered
in this chapter, and how you would tell them apart.
5. Why are the x and y coordinates of SPR_addSprite() measured in pixels while those of
VDP_drawImageEx(), seen in chapter 7, are measured in tiles? What practical problem
could assuming both functions use the same unit cause?
137

=== PAGE 144 ===
Chapter 22 — Creating Sprites
and Animation Sheets
Chapter 21 showed how to put an already-prepared sprite on screen, using SPR_init(),
SPR_addSprite(),SPR_update(),andthetileattributesdescribedbyTILE_ATTR.Thatchapter
deliberately left the other end of the process pending: how that sprite actually gets drawn.
This chapter closes that loop: how to put together your own animation sheet in a pixel
art editor, prepare it so that the SGDK resource compiler (rescomp) slices it correctly into
frames, and what real limits the Mega Drive’s sprite hardware imposes beyond what was
already introduced in Chapter 2.
MuchofthisworkflowdirectlyreuseswhatwasexplainedinChapter8aboutcreatinggraph-
ics with Aseprite: the same editor, the same Mega Drive palette, the same discipline of work-
ing in RGB mode and switching to indexed mode only at the very end. What gets added here
is everything that process needs when the graphic isn’t a single fixed image but a sequence
of frames that, on top of that, has to be turned into a sheet with an exact row-and-column
layout—thelayoutthatChapter23,dedicatedtospriteanimation,explainshowtointerpret
on the SGDK side.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it’s a good idea to have:
• Completed Chapter 8 (“Creating Graphics with Aseprite”): the Mega Drive palette, the
16-color limit, and the “RGB first, indexed at the end” order are assumed to be known
and won’t be repeated in detail here.
• CompletedChapter21(“DisplayingSprites”): theSPRITEresourceinresources.res,the
spriteengine,andthegeneralideathataspritecancontainseveralframesareassumed
to be known.
• A pixel art editor with support for animation frames and tags. The examples that follow
use Aseprite and its terminology, although the concept carries over to any equivalent
editor.
1. A sprite’s canvas: the size of one frame, not the whole
sheet
Creating a sprite starts the same way as creating a background: a new canvas, in RGB mode
(for the same reason already seen in Chapter 8: avoiding color-banding issues when switch-
ing to indexed mode with a palette that’s still too large), but this time with a Transparent
background instead of white or black, since a sprite needs real transparency so it doesn’t
cover whatever is behind it in the game.
138

=== PAGE 145 ===
Figure 63: New sprite creation dialog
New sprite creation dialog in Aseprite: 64×64 pixels, RGB mode, Transparent background.
It’sworthclarifyingapointwheretheeditoritselfusesthesamewordfortwodifferentthings:
when you choose a transparent background, Aseprite draws a checkered pattern as a visual
reference for that transparency, with a default checker size of 16×16 pixels. That checker
size is purely a visual aid from the editor and has no relation whatsoever to the frame width
and height declared in the SPRITE line of resources.res (seen in Chapter 21 and revisited in
Chapter 23): they’re two different uses of the idea of a “cell” that are worth not confusing.
To make the visual reference match the hardware’s real 8×8-pixel tiles, you can change that
checker size to 8×8 in the editor’s preferences.
The64×64-pixelsizechoseninthisexample(8×8tiles)ismerelythesizeofasingleframeof
the animation, not a hardware limit or the final size of the whole sheet: as more frames get
added, the sheet will grow horizontally or vertically well beyond this initial canvas. Section
5 comes back to this point when preparing the sheet for export.
2. Animation frames: adding, copying, and the role of dig-
ital tracing paper
With the first frame drawn, adding a new one is as simple as pressing the corresponding
button in the frames panel or the Alt+N keyboard shortcut; each press creates an additional,
emptyframe,readytobedrawn. Forasimpleanimation—abouncingball,say—it’senough
to copy the content of the previous frame, paste it into the new one, and nudge it slightly,
instead of redrawing the whole element frame by frame.
A feature that makes this work much easier, especially in animations more elaborate than
a simple ball, is digital tracing paper (onion skinning, by analogy with the semi-transparent
onionpapertraditionalanimatorsusedtodrawaframewhileseeingthepreviousonethrough
139

=== PAGE 146 ===
it). Whenenabled,theeditorshowstheprecedingandfollowingframesoverlaidanddimmed
behind the one currently being drawn.
Figure 64: Digital tracing paper enabled
Digital tracing paper (onion skinning) enabled: the current frame is drawn while seeing the
previous frames of the same animation, dimmed, underneath.
This makes it possible to keep trajectory and proportions consistent between frames without
constantly jumping back and forth to compare, which is especially valuable in walking or
attack animations, where each frame visually depends on the previous one. When playing
backtheanimationwiththeplaybutton,it’sagoodideatoturnoffonionskinningsoyoucan
preview the final result without the overlaid ghost frames.
The16-colors-per-palettelimit(seeninChapter2andrevisitedinChapter8)stillapplieshere
exactly the same way, counting the color reserved for transparency: a sprite as simple as a
ball, with a single fill color plus the transparency index, is already using two of the sixteen
available colors.
3. Several animations on a single sheet: the problem and
the solution with tags
Theballexamplehasonlyoneanimation,butarealcharacter—think,forinstance,ofasprite
sheetforanAxelStone–stylecharacter, theprotagonistofStreetsofRage2—usuallyneeds
several: standingstill,walking,attacking,andsoon. Allofthoseanimationsliveonthesame
sheet, one after another along the editor’s timeline.
The sheet’s 17 frames, still ungrouped: playing them in order mixes the static stance, idle,
walking, and special attack together, one after another, as if they were a single continuous
animation.
140

=== PAGE 147 ===
Figure 65: Timeline with ungrouped frames
Playing that sequence as-is mixes several animations into one continuous pass, which isn’t
what’s needed: each one has to be playable and previewable on its own. Aseprite’s solution
(and that of most editors with animation support) is tags: a range of consecutive frames
grouped under a named label. By selecting the corresponding frames and creating a new
tag for each block — for example stationary for the first static frame, idle for standing
idle,walkingforthewalkcycle,andgrand_upperforaspecialhit—eachanimationbecomes
identifiable and can be played back in isolation.
Theanimationsalreadygroupedintotagsvisibleonthetimeline: withatagselected,theplay
button plays back only that animation.
This grouping into tags isn’t just a convenience for previewing inside the editor: as shown
in Section 5, it’s also the mechanism Aseprite uses to export the final sheet with the row
separation that rescomp needs in order to recognize each animation as distinct — the same
row-and-column logic that Chapter 23 explains in detail on the SGDK side: each row of the
sheet corresponds to one animation, and each column within that row, to a successive frame.
4. The editor’s speed is not SGDK’s speed
Each frame within a tag can have its own duration inside the editor, adjustable by right-
clickingaframeandselectingitsproperties. Asepritemeasuresthatdurationinmilliseconds,
with a default value of 100.
Individual frame properties dialog: the duration is measured in milliseconds, not in the unit
SGDK uses later.
Lengthening the duration of a particular frame is a legitimate and common animation tech-
nique: it’s common, for example, for the last frame of a hit to be held a bit longer than the
resttogiveitmorevisualimpact,stretchingitfrom100to500milliseconds. It’salsopossible
141

=== PAGE 148 ===
Figure 66: Frames grouped into tags on the timeline
Figure 67: Individual frame properties
142

=== PAGE 149 ===
toselectseveralframesatonceandapplythesamedurationtoalloftheminonego,instead
of adjusting them one by one.
The duration set in the editor doesn’t travel with the exported image. It’s internal
Asepriteinformation,usefulonlyforpreviewingtheanimationwhiledrawingit,and
it disappears completely once the sheet is exported as a PNG.
Here lies the most common source of confusion: the animation’s actual speed in the game
depends exclusively on the animation-timing field of the SPRITE line in resources.res (intro-
duced in Chapter 21 and detailed in Chapter 23), measured in screen frames (sixtieths of a
second), not in milliseconds.
Since both values use different units, going from one to the other requires a manual conver-
sion. IfananimationwastimedinAsepriteat60millisecondsperframe,thatvaluehastobe
convertedtoSGDK’sunitbydividingbytheapproximatedurationofonesixtiethofasecond
(16.67 ms): 60 ÷ 16.67 ≈ 3.6. The result is almost never a whole number, so it has to be
rounded up or down, with the resulting small difference between the pace previewed in the
editorandtheonethatultimatelyrunsinthegame. There’snowaytoavoidthismanualstep
withthetoolscoveredsofar;it’sbesttosimplykeepitinmindaspartoftheworkflow,rather
than assuming that the value seen in Aseprite is the one that will end up in the game.
5. Preparing the sheet for export: palette, indexed mode,
and rows per animation
Withalltheframesandtagsalreadydefined,preparingthefinalfilerepeats,withonecaveat,
the same steps from Chapter 8. The caveat is that “New Palette from Sprite” this time has
to take into account the colors used across all frames at once, not in a single image: all
the frames on the same sheet share a single 16-color palette on the Mega Drive (the same
idea, already seen in Chapter 21, that PAL_setPalette() loads a single palette for the whole
resource), so the color reduction has to be done with the complete set of the animation in
mind, not frame by frame.
“New Palette from Sprite” processing all the frames on the sheet at once, so as to keep only
the colors actually used in any of them.
With the palette already trimmed to 16 colors or fewer, the next step is, just as with a back-
ground, changing the color mode from RGB to indexed.
ChangingthecolormodetoIndexed,oncethepalettehasalreadybeentrimmedto16colors
or fewer.
Before saving the file there’s a step that didn’t exist for a single-frame background: convert-
ing the editor’s individual frames into a single sprite sheet, using the Export Sprite Sheet
optionfromthefilemenu. Therearetwosettingstherethatreallymatterfortheresulttobe
compatible with what rescomp expects: the sheet type has to be “By Rows,”
Sprite sheet export dialog, Layout tab: sheet type set to “By Rows.”
and,inthespritesettingstabofthesamedialog,theSplitTagsoptionhastobeenabled. That
optioniswhatactuallyputseachanimation—eachtagcreatedinSection3—onitsownrow
of the final sheet, instead of leaving all frames in a single continuous row.
Sprite tab of the same dialog, with Split Tags enabled: the preview already shows each ani-
mation on its own row, exactly the layout rescomp expects.
This correspondence isn’t a coincidence: it’s exactly the same row-and-column logic on the
SGDKsidethatChapter23picksbackup. Settinguptheexportthiswayiswhatmakesboth
sides of the process — how Aseprite organizes the animations and how rescomp interprets
143

=== PAGE 150 ===
Figure 68: New Palette from Sprite
Figure 69: Changing color mode to Indexed
144

=== PAGE 151 ===
Figure 70: Sprite sheet export dialog, Layout tab
Figure 71: Sprite tab with Split Tags enabled
145

=== PAGE 152 ===
them — line up without any further manual adjustment. With the sheet already generated
and previewed, the last step is to open it (Open Sprite Sheet) and save it as a PNG, the same
way as any other Mega Drive graphic.
6. Real hardware limits for sprites
With the file now ready to import, this section steps away from Aseprite to talk about some-
thing that has so far been left implicit: how big sprites can be, how many fit on screen at
once, andwhathappenswhenaprojectgoespastthoselimits. Toillustrateit, pictureafight
against a flying final boss — in the style of a Castlevania boss — that fires many fireballs at
once, while the playable character and the HUD are also on screen at the same time.
Figure 72: Scene with a final boss and many sprites on screen
A boss fight scene: the playable character, the flying enemy, several fireballs, and the HUD
on screen at the same time, all of them sprites.
Chapter 2 already mentioned that the VDP’s sprite hardware has a maximum size per indi-
vidual sprite of 32×32 pixels (4×4 tiles). A character visually bigger than that — like an
Alucard-style protagonist from Castlevania, or a final boss — isn’t, strictly speaking, a single
hardware sprite, but several sprites of up to 32×32 (or another allowed size, from 8×8 to
32×32 in any combination) combined to form the complete figure. That assembly doesn’t
have to be programmed by hand: SGDK’s sprite engine, already used in Chapter 21 through
SPR_addSprite(), takes care of automatically splitting a SpriteDefinition that’s too large
into however many hardware sprites are needed, and of moving and animating them as if
they were a single one from the code’s point of view.
Thatautomaticassembly,however,doesn’tremovethequantitylimitsalreadyseeninChapter
2: in 320-pixel-wide mode (H40), the VDP can display a maximum of 80 hardware sprites in
total per frame, and no more than 20 sprites (or 40 tiles wide, whichever comes first) on any
single horizontal line of the screen. Exceeding that limit on a particular line doesn’t produce
146

=== PAGE 153 ===
an error or halt the game: the VDP simply stops drawing the sprites that exceed that line’s
quota for that particular frame, and since the set of dropped sprites can vary from frame to
frame, the visible result is flickering (sprite flicker) in the affected elements. A scene with
several fireballs, a large boss, and a HUD all competing for sprites on the same horizontal
lines starts showing exactly that flicker as soon as enough projectiles pile up on screen, both
in an emulator and on real hardware.
Sprite flicker was a much more frequent and noticeable problem on 8-bit consoles like the
NES or the Master System, with considerably tighter per-line sprite limits; the Mega Drive,
with its 20 sprites per line in H40, suffers from it less often, but isn’t completely immune
either, as any scene deliberately loaded with sprites demonstrates.
6.1 Transparent space costs nothing
Comparingtwodifferentwaysoforganizingthesameanimationsheetoffersaspecificlesson.
Suppose a first version of a sheet where the character is drawn pushed up against one side
of each cell, so the cell is as small as possible, under the reasonable-looking assumption that
a smaller cell saves VRAM and reduces the risk of flicker.
Figure 73: Character shifted to one side of the cell
First version of the sheet: the character drawn shifted toward the left side of each cell, to
minimize the required cell size.
Thatadjustment,however,bringsacostofadifferentkind: sincethecharacterisn’tcentered
withinitscell,flippingithorizontally(withflipH,alreadyusedinChapter21)tomakeitface
the opposite direction also shifts its apparent position on screen, which forces the collision
codetoconstantlyaccountforwhetherthecharacterisfacingleftorrightinordertocorrect
for that shift. A second version of the same sheet, with the character properly centered in
eachcell—atthecostofalotmoretransparentspacearoundit—solvestheproblem: when
flipped, the apparent position no longer shifts.
147

=== PAGE 154 ===
Figure 74: Character centered in the cell
Second version of the sheet: the character centered in each cell, with considerable transpar-
ent space on the sides; when flipped horizontally, the apparent position no longer shifts.
The counterintuitive part is that this extra transparent space has no real cost at all: rescomp
detects the completely empty areas of each frame and excludes them both from the VRAM
tilecountandfromthenumberofhardwarespritesneededtorepresentthecharacter,inthe
samewayChapter8alreadyexplainedthatSGDKdetectsandreusesflippedtiles. Centering
the character on the sheet, then, doesn’t cost any extra memory or make flicker worse: it’s
a code-organization improvement (fewer special cases for left and right) that comes free in
terms of hardware resources. The same optimization applies to animation frames that are
nearly identical to each other — for example, if a character’s head doesn’t change position
between two consecutive frames: rescomp can recognize duplicate frames and avoid storing
them again in VRAM, with no extra manual work required, although more demanding cases
of space optimization may call for hand-tuning the sheet.
6.2 When it’s not worth using a sprite
For truly enormous characters — a final boss that takes up a large part of the screen, for
example—neitherautomaticVRAMallocationnortransparent-spaceoptimizationisenough
tofullyavoidthecostofsomanycombinedhardwaresprites. Inthosecases,atrickinherited
from the 8-bit era is still valid on the Mega Drive: instead of building the enormous charac-
ter entirely out of sprites, it’s worth using one of the two background planes (BG_A or BG_B,
seen in Chapter 2) to draw it, reserving sprites for the parts that genuinely need to move
independently and with the pixel-level positioning freedom that sprites provide.
148

=== PAGE 155 ===
Review exercises
1. Explain the difference between the transparency checker size configured in the editor
(8×8 pixels, for example) and the frame width/height declared in the SPRITE line of re-
sources.res. Why is it a mistake to think they’re the same setting?
2. A teammate carefully adjusts the duration of each frame of an attack animation inside
Aseprite, making the final hit slower than the rest to give it impact. When testing the
game, the animation plays back at a uniform speed, with no change of pace on the final
hit. Explainwhythishappensandwhattheywouldneedtodotoachievetheeffectthey
were after.
3. WhyisitnecessarytoenabletheSplitTagsoptionwhenexportingaspritesheetbyrows,
instead of letting rescomp guess where one animation ends and the next begins?
4. A character is drawn pushed up against the edge of each cell of its animation sheet, to
minimize cell size. What programming problem does that decision introduce when the
character is flipped horizontally, and why does centering it in the cell have no real cost
in terms of VRAM or hardware sprites?
5. Afinalbosstakesuphalfthescreenand,whentested,thegameshowsnoticeableflicker
on several elements. Mention at least two different strategies, covered in this chapter,
for reducing or avoiding that problem.
149

=== PAGE 156 ===
Chapter 23 — Sprite Animation
Animation sheets, SPR_setAnim(), frame speed, and why it’s better to use #define instead of
loose numbers
Chapter 21 left us with a sprite on screen that could appear, move, and flip, but it looked
stiff: a single fixed image, with no motion of its own. This chapter fixes that and, along the
way, changes protagonists: instead of a single-frame character, the example switches to an
animation sheet for Axel Stone, the hero of Streets of Rage 2.
The change of file isn’t cosmetic. A single-frame sprite and a full animation sheet are, at
bottom, the same kind of resource (an indexed PNG that follows the palette and size rules
coveredinChapter22),butSGDKneedsextrainformationtoknowhowtosliceananimation
sheet into its individual frames and animations. That’s the first obstacle in this chapter, and
it shows up in the form of a compile error.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, you should already have:
• Chapter 21, “Displaying Sprites”: the SPRITE resource, the sprite engine (SPR_init(),
SPR_addSprite(), SPR_update()), TILE_ATTR(), and the fact that a sprite’s coordinates
are measured in pixels.
• Chapter 22, “Creating Sprites and Animation Sheets”: an animation sheet is still, first
and foremost, an indexed graphic subject to the 16-colors-per-palette limit and the
multiple-of-8 rule.
• BasicCnotions: variabledeclarations,andafirstideaofwhataconstantis(thisispicked
up again and expanded on in section 5 of this chapter and in Chapter 6).
1. From a sprite to an animation sheet: what changes in
the SPRITE resource
The starting point is the same project from the previous chapter. Switching sprites is, in
principle, a single step: copy the new PNG file into the res folder and update the file name
on the SPRITE line in resources.res, leaving the rest of the line untouched for now (still with
6 6, the tile size of the previous chapter’s sprite). Trying to compile as-is produces an error:
width (840) is not a multiple of cell width (48)
The message refers to a “cell width” of 48 pixels — exactly the 6 tiles of 8 pixels configured
ontheresourceline—andatotalimagewidthof840pixels,whichisn’tamultipleofthat48.
Theproblemisn’tthatthenewfilebreaksthemultiple-of-8rule(840doessatisfyit): it’sthat
the width declared in resources.res describes the size of a single animation frame, not the
size of the whole image, and that size changed when the sprite changed.
150

=== PAGE 157 ===
The reason for this field, which went unnoticed with a single-frame sprite, becomes clearer
when you look at the full animation sheet: unlike a static sprite, this file is one large image
that contains, arranged in a grid, every frame of every animation for the character. For this
particular sheet, each individual frame is 15×16 tiles (120×128 pixels). That’s the size that
needs to be declared where it previously said 6 6 (not the size of the whole sheet, which is
considerably larger), so that rescomp knows where one frame ends and the next begins:
SPRITE our_sprite "animated_sprite_15_16.png" 15 16 FAST 0
With these corrected values, the project compiles without errors. Once rescomp knows the
sizeofaframe,itsslicinglogicisstraightforward: eachfullrowofthesheetisinterpretedas
adistinctanimation,andeachcolumnwithinthatrowasasuccessiveframeofthatanimation.
This idea is picked up in more detail in section 3.
Figure 75: Axel Stone’s animation sheet divided into a grid
Figure 1: Axel’s full sheet: each row is a distinct animation, and each column within a row is
a successive frame of that animation.
2. Reminder: position is still measured in pixels
With the sprite now compiling, it’s worth doing a quick visual check before moving on to the
actual animation. Running the project with the position inherited from the previous chapter
(100, 100), the new sprite — larger than the original — ends up with much of its body off the
visible screen, near the bottom edge. Adjusting the y coordinate from 100 to 50 centers it
better.
This adjustment is simply a direct application of what was already covered in Chapter 21: x
and y in SPR_addSprite() are pixel coordinates, not tile coordinates, so the exact value that
centers a sprite depends on its actual size in pixels, not on a fixed formula.
151

=== PAGE 158 ===
3. Playing an animation: SPR_setAnim()
With the sprite properly positioned, what’s still missing is the core of the chapter: making it
playoneofitsanimationsinsteadofstayingonasinglefixedframe. Thefunctionthatchooses
which animation to play is:
void SPR_setAnim(Sprite *sprite, s16 anim);
The first parameter is the pointer to the sprite already returned by SPR_addSprite() (player,
in this example); the second, anim, is the index of the animation to play. To understand what
that index means, we need to look at the full sheet again: each row is a distinct animation.
On this particular sheet, from top to bottom: row 0 is a single static frame, with no real
animation; row1istheidleanimation; row2isthewalkcycle; androw3istheGrandUpper
punch, Axel’s signature move in Streets of Rage 2.
As is customary in programming, numbering starts at 0. Calling the function with index 0,
then, produces no visible motion, because that particular row contains only a single frame:
SPR_setAnim(player, 0);
Changingthesecondargumentto1should,inprinciple,playtheidleanimation. Butdoingso
and recompiling, the sprite still doesn’t move: there’s no error in this line, just a value that’s
still left unconfigured, as shown in the next section.
4. Animation speed: the last field in resources.res
Thereasonanimation1doesn’tmoveliesinthelastfieldoftheSPRITElineinresources.res,
theonethat’sbeenleftat0sofar. Thatfieldisthedurationofeachframe,expressedinscreen
frames (1/60 of a second on the NTSC variant of the console). At 0, automatic animation is
disabled entirely, which is why no animation index has produced any movement so far, so it
needs to be set to a value greater than zero for the sprite engine to advance frames on its
own.
Avalueof60turnsout,inpractice,tobetooslow: with60screenframesperanimation-frame
change, and running at 60 frames per second, the animation changes only once per second
— a noticeably slower pace than expected. Lowering the value makes the animation advance
more often; a value of around 15 for the idle animation gives a visually reasonable result:
SPRITE our_sprite "animated_sprite_15_16.png" 15 16 FAST 15
Changingtheanimationindexto2(thewalkcycle)andadjustingthespeedindependently,in
this case to 8 — noticeably faster than the idle animation’s — completes the example:
SPRITE our_sprite "animated_sprite_15_16.png" 15 16 FAST 8
SPR_setAnim(player, 2);
This mechanism, as used so far, has a limitation: the speed field in resources.res is a single
value per resource, not one per animation, so changing it affects all four rows of the sheet
equally. rescomp offers, for anyone who needs a different speed per frame or per animation
within the same sheet, a more advanced syntax with nested brackets that goes beyond the
scopeofthisintroductorychapterandispickeduplaterinthismanual. It’sworthknowingit
exists,becausesoonerorlaterthedifferencebetweenanimationsbecomesarealissue—for
example,aslowidleanimationcoexistingwithafastattackanimationonthesamecharacter.
152

=== PAGE 159 ===
5. From loose numbers to meaningful names: why #define
Up to now, the animation index was written as a loose number directly in the call to
SPR_setAnim(): 0, 1, 2, or 3. In programming this is known as a magic number (or, more
informally, hardcoding a value), and it’s a practice worth avoiding as code grows: a loose
number says nothing about its purpose, and finding and fixing every occurrence of that
number if its meaning ever changes becomes a tedious, error-prone task.
The natural first step is to replace the number with a variable:
int anim = 3;
SPR_setAnim(player, anim);
Thisalreadyimprovesreadability,butanordinaryvariable(int)canchangevalueatanypoint
intheprogram,andtheindexoftheGrandUpper animationonthisparticularsheetisnever
going to change: it will always be 3, no matter what else the rest of the code does. For that
case — a fixed value that should never change — C offers the const qualifier:
const int ANIM_UPPER = 3;
Besides fixing the value, changing the name from anim to ANIM_UPPER solves the other real
problem with a magic number: you no longer need to remember by heart that “the special
move animation is number 3” — reading the name is enough. The convention of writing
constants entirely in uppercase, with underscores between words, is a widespread practice
in C (though not required by the language) that helps you tell, just by looking at the code,
which identifiers are constants and which aren’t.
For this kind of value, though, it’s worth going one step further and replacing const with
#define. As explained in Chapter 6, the Mega Drive has very little RAM available — barely
64 KB in total (Chapter 1) — and that’s a resource worth actively conserving throughout the
game’scode. #defineisatextsubstitutionthatthepreprocessorresolvesbeforethecompiler
ever sees the code, so it doesn’t reserve any memory for the constant at run time; const, on
the other hand, depending on the compiler and optimization level used, can end up taking
up real space (the exact comparison between the two forms is well beyond what this chapter
needs, and depends on specific details of the toolchain; it’s enough to know that #define
is, in principle, the safer choice in such a memory-constrained environment). The syntax of
#defineisalsodeliberatelydifferentfromthatofavariabledeclaration: ithasnoequalssign
and no semicolon.
#define ANIM_STILL 0
#define ANIM_IDLE 1
#define ANIM_WALK 2
#define ANIM_UPPER 3
With the four constants now defined, the final code is considerably more readable than the
loose-number version from the start of the chapter:
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_UPPER);
ThebehaviorisidenticaltowritingSPR_setAnim(player, 3)directly,butthecodenowreads
on its own: anyone opening this file knows, without having to go check the animation sheet,
that this line plays the character’s special move. From here on, this manual uses #define
consistently for this kind of fixed value, including sound management later in the book.
153

=== PAGE 160 ===
Review exercises
1. A teammate replaces one animation sheet with another that has larger frames, but for-
gets to update the width and height values on the SPRITE line in resources.res. What
error should they expect to see, and why does the message talk about a “cell width”
rather than the width of the whole image directly?
2. Whatrelationshipistherebetweentherowsandcolumnsofananimationsheetandthe
parametersof SPR_setAnim()andSPR_setFrame()—thelatterbeingafunctionthatsets
aspecificframewithinananimation,insteadoflettingitadvanceonitsown? Explainin
your own words what index 0 means in each case.
3. A sprite is correctly added to the scene, SPR_setAnim(player, 2) is called, and yet no
movement is observed on screen. List at least two possible causes related to what was
covered in this chapter, and how to tell them apart.
4. Explain, in your own words, the difference between hardcoding a number, using a vari-
able (int), using a constant (const), and using #define to represent an animation index.
Whichofthesefouroptionswouldyouchooseforavaluethatshouldneverchangeduring
the game’s execution, and why?
5. Why does changing the animation speed in resources.res affect all four animations on
Axel’s sheet equally, rather than just the one being tested at a given moment? What
would need to be done, in general terms, to make the idle animation slower than the
walk animation without having to pick a single compromise value for both?
154

=== PAGE 161 ===
Chapter 24 — 2D Camera
Alevelmaplargerthanthescreen(chapter11)andacharacterthatmoveswithdecimalpre-
cision(chapter6)are,separately,halfthesolution. What’smissingisthepiecethatconnects
them: a camera that follows the character as it moves across that large map, without letting
either the camera or the character itself go past its limits. This chapter builds that feature
step by step, using a Zelda-style map and sprite as an example, although the resulting logic
is independent of any specific game and can be reused as-is in any project with scrolling.
Figure 76: The final result of this chapter
A character moves across a large map while the camera follows it and keeps it centered on
the screen.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, you should already have in place:
• A level map larger than the screen, with the TILESET/MAP/PALETTE resources already de-
claredandloadedwithMAP_create(),andtheMAP_scrollTo()functiontoscrollit(chap-
ter 11).
155

=== PAGE 162 ===
• Thefix32type,theFIX32()macro,andconversiontointegerwithF32_toInt()(chapter
6).
• A sprite already created and positioned with SPR_setPosition(), which takes s16 coor-
dinates (chapter 21).
• Ahandle_input()functionthatalreadymovesthecharacteraccordingtotheD-pad;this
chapterreusesitwithoutchangingitsinternallogic,andsimplyaddsthecameraontop
of it.
1. The starting point: a large map with no camera
We start from a project that already displays a large map and moves a sprite over it: the
resources are declared, the map is loaded with MAP_create(), the sprite exists, and han-
dle_input()alreadymovesthecharacterwiththeD-pad. Theonlythingmissingis,precisely,
the subject of this chapter. If this starting point is compiled and run as-is, the character can
roam across the whole map, but the camera never moves: as soon as the character gets far
enough from its starting point, it walks off the screen with nothing following it.
2. Organization: function prototypes
Before writing the camera, it’s worth making an organizational adjustment to the existing
code: movetheentirebodyofhandle_input()totheendofthefile,leavingonlytheprototype
initsoriginalplace(thefunction’sfirstline,endinginasemicolon,withnobody). Unlikemore
modernlanguages,theCcompilerdoesnotscantherestofthefilelookingforafunctionused
before its definition; without a prototype declared before the point where it’s used, it simply
refuses to compile. Organizing the file this way — prototypes at the top, full definitions at
the bottom — is a common C convention that lets you read the program’s main flow without
constantlyjumpingtoreadthebodyofeachfunction,somethingthatbecomesmorevaluable
the more functions of your own you add, like the camera function this chapter is about to
define:
static void handle_input();
static void camera();
3. Revisiting fix32 for character movement
The second preparatory adjustment is changing the character’s position variables (link_x,
link_y)frominttofix32,asrecommendedinchapter6foranycharacterpositiononalarge
map: itallowsdecimalvalues(aspeedof1.5pixelsperframe,insteadofawholenumber)and
offers enough range for large maps. Since SPR_addSprite() and SPR_setPosition() expect
integers rather than fix32 values, every use of link_x or link_y inside those functions must
first go through F32_toInt():
fix32 link_x;
fix32 link_y;
fix32 link_vel = FIX32(1.5);
s16 current_camera_x;
s16 current_camera_y;
With this, the character now moves with decimal precision, although in this example the
difference from whole-number movement isn’t very noticeable. The change is made anyway
156

=== PAGE 163 ===
because fix32 is the recommended type for any character or enemy position on a map, and
it’s worth getting used to using it from the start.
current_camera_xandcurrent_camera_yaredeclaredass16insteadof int: theytakeuphalf
thememoryandaremorethanenoughtorepresentapositionwithinamapofthissize. This
holds as long as the map doesn’t exceed roughly 32,000 pixels per side, which is the limit of
an s16; for maps larger than that threshold you’d need to go back to int (or u32, depending
on the case).
4. The concept: the screen as a box that follows the char-
acter
Beforewritingcode,it’sworthhavingthegeneralideaclear. Thescreen—320by224pixels
in H40 mode — can be thought of as a box that moves across the whole map, trying to keep
the character near its center. Inside that box the character has its own coordinates (link_x
andlink_y,thetop-leftcornerofitssprite),andtheboxitselfhasitsowncoordinateswithin
the full map: this chapter calls those coordinates camera_x and camera_y.
Figure 77: The camera concept as a box over the map
The box marks the visible area on screen within the full map, and the character has its own
coordinates inside that box.
current_camera_x and current_camera_y, declared in the previous step, keep track of where
the camera is at any given moment. Unlike a variable declared inside a function (which is
destroyed as soon as the function ends and recreated the next time around), these need to
persist from one frame to the next, so they have to be global, declared before main().
The next step is to decide, via #define constants, how far from each edge of the screen the
characterhastobebeforethecamerastartsmoving: oneconstantforeachofthefouredges,
with starting values that can be tweaked later:
157

=== PAGE 164 ===
#define HOW_FAR_TO_LEFT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES 140
#define HOW_FAR_TO_RIGHT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES 140
#define HOW_FAR_TO_UP_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES 90
#define HOW_FAR_TO_DOWN_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES 90
5. The character’s position on the map and on the screen
With the global variables and constants already in place, the rest of the code goes inside
a new function, camera(). The first step is to convert the character’s fix32 position into a
plaininteger,sincethecomparisonsandcalculationsthatfollowdon’tneeddecimalprecision.
Unlikecurrent_camera_x/current_camera_y,thisvariablecan—andshould—belocaltothe
function: it’s only needed during this same frame, so it isn’t worth having it permanently
occupy RAM the way a global variable does.
s16 player_x_map_integer = F32_toInt(link_x);
s16 player_y_map_integer = F32_toInt(link_y);
Now we need to figure out where the character is relative to the screen, rather than to the
full map: it’s enough to subtract the camera’s current position from the character’s position
on the map, since that is precisely the coordinate of the screen’s top-left corner within the
map:
s16 player_x_position_on_screen = player_x_map_integer - current_camera_x;
s16 player_y_position_on_screen = player_y_map_integer - current_camera_y;
6. Calculating the camera’s new position
Withthecharacter’son-screenpositionalreadycalculated,thenextstepistodecidewhether
the camera needs to move, by comparing that position against the four constants defined
earlier. If the character has crossed the screen’s right-hand limit, the camera’s new position
is calculated by subtracting that same limit distance from the character’s position on the
map,sothatthecharacterendsupexactlyattheallowededgeinsteadofcontinuingtomove
furtheraway. Thesamereasoning,withthecomparisonsignflipped,coverstheleftside;and
if neither case applies, the camera simply keeps its current position:
s16 new_camera_x;
s16 new_camera_y;
if (player_x_position_on_screen > HOW_FAR_TO_RIGHT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES)
new_camera_x = player_x_map_integer - HOW_FAR_TO_RIGHT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES;
else if (player_x_position_on_screen < HOW_FAR_TO_LEFT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES)
new_camera_x = player_x_map_integer - HOW_FAR_TO_LEFT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES;
else
new_camera_x = current_camera_x;
That same block of three cases (edge crossed on one side, on the other side, or no change)
isrepeatedin anentirelyanalogous wayforthe verticalaxis, withone caveatworthpointing
out: since the screen’s Y coordinate grows downward (0 at the top, 224 at the bottom), the
conditionthattriggersdownwardmovementusesa“greaterthan,”whichatfirstglancemight
seem counterintuitive if you think in terms of “up” and “down” rather than in terms of the
numeric coordinate:
158

=== PAGE 165 ===
if (player_y_position_on_screen > HOW_FAR_TO_DOWN_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES)
new_camera_y = player_y_map_integer - HOW_FAR_TO_DOWN_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES;
else if (player_y_position_on_screen < HOW_FAR_TO_UP_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES)
new_camera_y = player_y_map_integer - HOW_FAR_TO_UP_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES;
else
new_camera_y = current_camera_y;
7. Applying the scroll: MAP_scrollTo() only when needed
Now that the camera’s new position has been calculated, we still need to decide whether
it actually changed from the previous position: if the character hasn’t moved far enough to
cross any of the limits, the camera doesn’t need to move, and calling MAP_scrollTo() every
frameunnecessarilywouldbeawasteofCPUwork. Thecomparisonusesthelogicalequality
operator (two equal signs, as opposed to assignment with a single one) and the logical “or”
operator (two vertical bars), since a change on either axis is enough to justify a new scroll:
if ((current_camera_x != new_camera_x) || (current_camera_y != new_camera_y)) {
current_camera_x = new_camera_x;
current_camera_y = new_camera_y;
MAP_scrollTo(level_map, current_camera_x, current_camera_y);
}
If the condition is true, the code updates the global variables with the new values (so that
next frame’s comparison has the correct reference) and only then calls MAP_scrollTo(), the
same function already used in chapter 11, this time with the freshly calculated coordinates.
8. First results, and the adjustment to center the character
With the camera function already written, we still need to add the call inside the main loop,
right after handle_input():
while(1) {
handle_input();
camera();
SPR_update();
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
With that adjustment the camera now moves following the character, but there’s still a prob-
lem left: the sprite is still being drawn at its position within the full map, instead of at its
position relative to the current screen. The solution is the same subtraction already used to
calculate player_x_position_on_screen: SPR_setPosition() needs the character’s position
minus the camera’s position, not the absolute position on the map. This line is moved from
the main loop to the end of the camera() function itself, since that’s where it makes sense to
update it:
SPR_setPosition(link_sprite, F32_toInt(link_x) - new_camera_x, F32_toInt(link_y) -
↪ new_camera_y);
Using new_camera_x/new_camera_y instead of current_camera_x/current_camera_y works in
eithercase: whenthecameraactuallymoved,bothvariablesarealreadysynchronizedbythe
159

=== PAGE 166 ===
assignment in the previous step; when it didn’t move, new_camera_x/new_camera_y already
heldthesamevalueascurrent_camera_x/current_camera_yfromtheedge-comparisonblock.
SPR_setPosition()takess16coordinates,asseeninchapter21,andthissubtractionbetween
two already-calculated integers fits that type directly.
9. Keeping the camera from leaving the map
With the character now correctly centered, there’s still a visible problem when approaching
any edge of the map: the camera keeps scrolling beyond the map itself, showing repeated
tiles or visual artifacts in the areas that fall outside the actual bounds.
Figure 78: The camera scrolling past the actual edge of the map
Without bounding the camera, the graphics repeat incorrectly in the area that no longer cor-
responds to any valid map tile.
Thesolutionistoclampnew_camera_xandnew_camera_ytoavalidrange,whichrequiresfour
newconstants: thehorizontalandverticalscreenresolution,andthewidthandheightofthe
full map (1024 by 1024 pixels in this particular map, although the exact value depends on
each project):
#define HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION 320
#define VERTICAL_RESOLUTION 224
#define MAP_WIDTH 1024
#define MAP_HEIGHT 1024
With those constants defined, the left and top limits are simple: if new_camera_x or
new_camera_y fall below 0, they’re set to 0. The right and bottom limits require a small
calculation: the camera can’t exceed the total width (or height) of the map minus the screen
resolution, since otherwise it would show content beyond the map itself:
160

=== PAGE 167 ===
if (new_camera_x < 0)
new_camera_x = 0;
else if (new_camera_x > MAP_WIDTH - HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION)
new_camera_x = MAP_WIDTH - HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION;
if (new_camera_y < 0)
new_camera_y = 0;
else if (new_camera_y > MAP_HEIGHT - VERTICAL_RESOLUTION)
new_camera_y = MAP_HEIGHT - VERTICAL_RESOLUTION;
This block goes after calculating new_camera_x/new_camera_y in step 6, and before the com-
parison against current_camera_x/current_camera_y in step 7. With this, the camera now
respects the map’s four edges: upon reaching any corner, it stops scrolling instead of show-
ing content outside the bounds.
10. Keeping the character itself from leaving the screen
Withthecameranowbounded,onelastdetailremains: eventhoughthemapnolongerscrolls
beyond its limits, the character can still visually keep walking off the screen in those same
edge areas, because nothing stops it from continuing to move even after the camera has
stoppedfollowingit. Thesolutionisanalogoustothecamera’sown,butappliedtolink_xand
link_y, and using the character sprite’s width and height (two additional constants) instead
of the screen resolution:
#define PLAYER_WIDTH 32
#define PLAYER_HEIGHT 32
if (link_x < 0)
link_x = 0;
else if (link_x > FIX32(MAP_WIDTH - PLAYER_WIDTH))
link_x = FIX32(MAP_WIDTH - PLAYER_WIDTH);
if (link_y < 0)
link_y = 0;
else if (link_y > FIX32(MAP_HEIGHT - PLAYER_HEIGHT))
link_y = FIX32(MAP_HEIGHT - PLAYER_HEIGHT);
Sincelink_xandlink_yarefix32,thelimitsareexpressedwithFIX32()sothatcomparisons
andassignmentshappenonthesamescale. Thisblockisplacedatthebeginningofthe cam-
era() function, before calculating anything related to the camera itself, since conceptually it
corrects the character’s position before the rest of the function uses it for any other calcula-
tion. With this adjustment, both the camera and the character itself respect the map’s limits
in all four directions.
The complete function
Putting the ten steps above together in order, camera() ends up looking like this:
static void camera() {
// Correct the character if it went past the map's limits
if (link_x < 0)
link_x = 0;
else if (link_x > FIX32(MAP_WIDTH - PLAYER_WIDTH))
161

=== PAGE 168 ===
link_x = FIX32(MAP_WIDTH - PLAYER_WIDTH);
if (link_y < 0)
link_y = 0;
else if (link_y > FIX32(MAP_HEIGHT - PLAYER_HEIGHT))
link_y = FIX32(MAP_HEIGHT - PLAYER_HEIGHT);
// Character's integer position on the map
s16 player_x_map_integer = F32_toInt(link_x);
s16 player_y_map_integer = F32_toInt(link_y);
// Character's position relative to the screen
s16 player_x_position_on_screen = player_x_map_integer - current_camera_x;
s16 player_y_position_on_screen = player_y_map_integer - current_camera_y;
// New camera position based on the four edges
s16 new_camera_x;
s16 new_camera_y;
if (player_x_position_on_screen > HOW_FAR_TO_RIGHT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES)
new_camera_x = player_x_map_integer - HOW_FAR_TO_RIGHT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES;
else if (player_x_position_on_screen < HOW_FAR_TO_LEFT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES)
new_camera_x = player_x_map_integer - HOW_FAR_TO_LEFT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES;
else
new_camera_x = current_camera_x;
if (player_y_position_on_screen > HOW_FAR_TO_DOWN_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES)
new_camera_y = player_y_map_integer - HOW_FAR_TO_DOWN_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES;
else if (player_y_position_on_screen < HOW_FAR_TO_UP_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES)
new_camera_y = player_y_map_integer - HOW_FAR_TO_UP_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES;
else
new_camera_y = current_camera_y;
// The camera can't go past the map
if (new_camera_x < 0)
new_camera_x = 0;
else if (new_camera_x > MAP_WIDTH - HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION)
new_camera_x = MAP_WIDTH - HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION;
if (new_camera_y < 0)
new_camera_y = 0;
else if (new_camera_y > MAP_HEIGHT - VERTICAL_RESOLUTION)
new_camera_y = MAP_HEIGHT - VERTICAL_RESOLUTION;
// Scroll the map only if the camera position changed
if ((current_camera_x != new_camera_x) || (current_camera_y != new_camera_y)) {
current_camera_x = new_camera_x;
current_camera_y = new_camera_y;
MAP_scrollTo(level_map, current_camera_x, current_camera_y);
}
// Reposition the sprite relative to the camera, not the full map
162

=== PAGE 169 ===
SPR_setPosition(link_sprite, F32_toInt(link_x) - new_camera_x,
↪ F32_toInt(link_y) - new_camera_y);
}
11. Adjusting the feel of the camera
Nowthatthefunctionisworkingwithouterrors,changingthefourHOW_FAR_TO_*_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES
constantsisthesimplestwaytoadjusthowstrictlythecamerakeepsthecharactercentered:
smaller values keep it almost always at the exact center of the screen, while larger values
giveitmore freedomof movementbeforethe camerareacts, atthe costof acharacter that’s
less centered at any given moment. How tight the camera should be is a design decision for
each particular game, not a fixed technical rule: more elaborate cameras, for example, push
the view ahead in the direction the character is facing to show more of the path forward,
although that behavior can feel uncomfortable if the camera shifts too abruptly every time
the character changes direction.
Thecompletesetofconstantsgoverningthecamera’sbehaviorarethefourscreen
margins, the horizontal and vertical resolution, and the dimensions of the map and
the sprite. Adjusting just the four margins is enough to completely change the feel
of the camera without touching the rest of the logic.
12. Adapting the camera to H32 resolution mode
Towrapup,let’sconfirmthatthesamecamerafunctionworksjustaswellinH32mode(256
pixels wide, seen in chapter 10). The resolution change itself is still the same line of code as
always:
VDP_setScreenWidth256();
The only additional adjustment needed is updating HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION to 256 and the
HOW_FAR_TO_LEFT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES/HOW_FAR_TO_RIGHT_BEFORE_CAMERA_MOVES constants
so they still represent, roughly, half of the new horizontal resolution, so that the character
stays centered in this mode too. The rest of the camera() function needs no changes at all:
allthelimitandscrolllogicisalreadyindependentofthespecificresolution,becauseitrelies
on constants rather than on raw numbers written directly into the code.
Review exercises
1. Explain the difference between a character’s position “on the map” and its position “on
screen,” and how the latter is calculated from the former.
2. Whyisplayer_x_map_integerdeclaredasalocalvariableinsidecamera()ratherthanas
a global variable, unlike current_camera_x?
3. Explain what the check if ((current_camera_x != new_camera_x) || (cur-
rent_camera_y != new_camera_y)) is for before calling MAP_scrollTo(), and what
problem it avoids.
4. A teammate implements the limits that keep the camera from leaving the map, but not
thelimitsthatkeepthecharacteritselffromleavingthescreen. Describewhatincorrect
behavior would be observed when approaching any edge of the map.
5. Explain why SPR_setPosition() must receive the character’s position minus the cam-
era’s position, rather than the character’s position on the map directly.
163

=== PAGE 170 ===
Chapter 25 — Parallax Scrolling
Over a Camera
Combining a parallax background with the camera of a large map: inverted parallax, multi-
plication versus subtraction, and the real limit of a repeating image
Chapter 9 introduced basic parallax scrolling: two backgrounds moving automatically at dif-
ferent speeds, with no relation to any character. Chapter 24, for its part, showed how to
scroll a large map based on a character’s position, but without any additional background
behindit. Thischaptercombinesbothideas: aparallaxbackgroundthatscrollsaccordingto
the very same camera that already follows the character over the main map, with two new
complications that did not appear in either chapter on its own.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it’s a good idea to have on hand:
• Chapter 24 (“2D Camera”) already worked through: the camera() function, the cur-
rent_camera_x/current_camera_y variables, and the map and character limits.
• Chapter 9 (“Scrolling and Parallax Scrolling”): VDP_setScrollingMode() and the use of
two background planes (BG_A and BG_B).
• Chapter 7 (“How to Display Backgrounds on the Mega Drive”): the IMAGE resource and
VDP_drawImageEx().
1. Starting point: two different graphics resources
The example in this chapter combines a foreground map (the same kind of TILESET + MAP
resource already seen in Chapter 11) with a distant background image. The foreground map
measures 6176 pixels wide by 352 pixels tall — considerably taller than the screen’s 224
pixels, so as to also demonstrate vertical scrolling — while the background image respects
the already familiar limit of an IMAGE resource: 512×256 pixels at most.
Thestartingpointis,quitesimply,thefinishedcodefromthecamerachapter,withthegraph-
icsresourcesswappedoutandthemapandspritewidth/heightconstantsupdatedtothenew
values. On top of that code, it’s worth applying two minor adjustments as well:
Use s16 instead of int for the coordinates. As explained in Chapter 6, it’s always best to
use the smallest type that will do the job. This example’s map, at 6176 pixels wide, remains
well below the roughly 32,000-pixel limit of an s16, so declaring the camera coordinates as
s16 instead of int requires less CPU work and less ROM, without losing any useful range.
Simplifysingle-statementifs. InC,whenthebodyofaniforanelse ifcontainsasingle
statement,thebracesdelimitingthatbodyareoptional,andremovingthemtoleavethestate-
164

=== PAGE 171 ===
ment on the same line changes nothing about the program’s behavior. Blocks that execute
morethanonestatement(forexample,withininputhandling,whereit’softennecessaryboth
to move the character and, eventually, to change its animation) still need braces, since there
they are indeed mandatory.
2. Adding the background image: palettes and planes
WiththeforegroundmapalreadyonBG_AusingPAL1foritscolors—andnotPAL0,preciselyto
highlightausefuleffectworthrecognizing: thefirstcolorofanypaletteotherthan0isalways
transparent,soifabackgroundevershowsupasanunexpectedsolidcolor(pink,say)without
having loaded any new palette, that’s a sign that plane is displaying transparency over the
VDP’s background color instead of its actual colors — adding the distant background image
requires its own call to PAL_setPalette(), this time with PAL0:
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, bg_far.palette->data, DMA);
PAL_setPalette(PAL1, map_tileset.palette->data, DMA);
PAL_setPalette(PAL2, player_sprite.palette->data, DMA);
With the palette already assigned, displaying the image on screen uses the same
VDP_drawImageEx() function already seen in Chapter 7, this time targeting the BG_B
plane (the back plane, behind the foreground map that occupies BG_A):
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, &bg_far, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, ind), 0,
↪ 0, TRUE, TRUE);
Compiling at this point, the foreground map scrolls normally thanks to the camera already
builtinChapter24,andthebackgroundimageshowsallitscolorscorrectly,butiscompletely
static: withoutadditionalcode,animageloadedwithVDP_drawImageEx()doesn’tscrollonits
own. Thiswouldbeexactlythedesiredbehaviorforafixed, single-screenbackground, butit
isn’t the goal of this chapter.
3. Enabling background scrolling
Thefirststeptowardmakingthebackgroundscrollableis,justasinChapter9,todeclarethe
VDP’s scrolling mode with VDP_setScrollingMode(), choosing full-plane scrolling — rather
than per-tile or per-line scrolling, two more advanced modes covered in Part II that aren’t
available for a MAP resource, only for IMAGE — for both the horizontal and vertical axes:
VDP_setScrollingMode(HSCROLL_PLANE, VSCROLL_PLANE);
With the scrolling mode already chosen, two new variables are needed — b_hscroll and
b_vscroll, also declared as s16 — to store how much to shift the background on each axis,
along with two calls to VDP_setHorizontalScroll() and VDP_setVerticalScroll() inside the
camerafunction,inthesameblockwhereMAP_scrollTo()isalreadycalledfortheforeground
map:
VDP_setHorizontalScroll(BG_B, b_hscroll);
VDP_setVerticalScroll(BG_B, b_vscroll);
4. An unexpected problem: inverted parallax
Thesimplestwaytogiveb_hscrollandb_vscrollsomevalueistoassignthemdirectlyfrom
new_camera_x and new_camera_y, the same coordinates already used to scroll the foreground
165

=== PAGE 172 ===
map. Compiling with that change, vertical scrolling behaves as expected (background and
foregroundmovingexactlythesame,withnodeptheffectyet),buthorizontalscrollingreveals
aproblem: thebackgroundmovesintheoppositedirectionfromwhat’sexpected,aninverted
and visually unpleasant parallax effect.
The cause is conceptual: MAP_scrollTo() expects the camera’s position in order to scroll the
map in the correct direction, but VDP_setHorizontalScroll() interprets its parameter differ-
ently for a background image, so assigning it the same camera coordinate directly produces
the opposite of the intended effect.
5. Fixing the direction: multiplication versus subtraction
Themostintuitivesolutionistoflipthesignof new_camera_xbeforeassigningittob_hscroll,
by multiplying it by -1:
b_hscroll = new_camera_x * -1;
Thissolutionworks,butit’sworthkeepinganunderlyingissueinmind: theMegaDrive’sCPU
(aMotorola68000,which,asexplainedinChapter1,doesn’thaveamultiplicationordivision
unit as fast as its basic arithmetic and logic operations) isn’t especially quick at performing
multiplications or divisions, so it’s best to avoid them whenever a simpler alternative exists.
In this case, subtracting the value from 0 achieves exactly the same result as multiplying by
-1, without needing any multiplication at all:
b_hscroll = 0 - new_camera_x;
6. Depth with powers of two: bit shifting instead of divid-
ing
With the direction now fixed, the next step is to make the background scroll more slowly
than the foreground, to create a sense of depth: the farther away a background element is
supposed to be, the more slowly it should move relative to the character. The most intuitive
approach is to divide new_camera_x by some number — 2 for half speed, 3 for a third, and
so on — but division, like multiplication, is a relatively costly operation for this CPU. The
recommended alternative is bit shifting: shifting all the bits of a number one position to the
right is exactly equivalent to dividing it by 2; shifting two positions is equivalent to dividing
by 4; three positions, by 8; and so on, always in powers of 2. Since the CPU works in binary,
shifting bits is a much simpler and faster operation than a generic division:
b_hscroll = (0 - new_camera_x) >> 1; // half speed
Trying out different shift amounts is a quick way to fine-tune the sense of depth until finding
the one that best matches how distant that landscape element is supposed to be. For a back-
ground of distant mountains and forest, shifting three positions (dividing by 8) on both axes
tends to be a good starting point:
b_hscroll = (0 - new_camera_x) >> 3;
b_vscroll = (0 - new_camera_y) >> 3;
This value for b_vscroll, however, isn’t final yet: the next section adjusts it again to solve a
different problem with vertical scrolling.
166

=== PAGE 173 ===
7. A problem when scrolling vertically: the background
repeating
With horizontal parallax now working correctly, scrolling vertically reveals a different prob-
lem: at some point, the background image starts repeating vertically, showing its top part
againbeforefinishingshowingthebottom. Thisisavisuallyincorrecteffectforaplatformer,
though it might be acceptable in a vertical shooter where a repeating background makes
sense. The cause is the difference between the image’s height (256 pixels, the maximum al-
lowed for an IMAGE resource) and the screen’s height (224 pixels): a margin of only 32 pixels
before the vertical scroll exceeds the image’s actual height and starts showing it again from
the beginning.
Thesolutionistoclampb_vscrolltothat32-pixelrange,usingthesamelogicalreadyusedin
Chapter 24 to keep the camera from going outside the map: a lower limit of 0, and an upper
limit of 32 (the difference between the image’s height and the screen’s height):
if (b_vscroll < 0)
b_vscroll = 0;
else if (b_vscroll > 32)
b_vscroll = 32;
With this limit in place, the background stops repeating vertically no matter how far the
camera scrolls up or down, although — as was already the case with horizontal scrolling of
a repeating map — the background keeps repeating continuously along the horizontal axis,
which is perfectly correct for a background image meant to repeat along that axis.
Thislower-limitcheckmightturnouttobeunnecessaryifthecamera’sYcoordinate,
which new_camera_y depends on, is already clamped to a minimum of 0 inside the
camera() function from Chapter 24. Even so, keeping it costs nothing and leaves
the code safe against future changes to that function.
8. Why not use two maps instead of a map and an image?
A reasonable question is why not use two MAP resources (one for each plane) instead of com-
bining a MAP for the foreground with an IMAGE for the background, since in principle both
could be scrolled with MAP_scrollTo(). The reason is twofold. On one hand, an IMAGE re-
sourcesupportstheper-tileorper-linescrollingmodesseeninPartIIofthismanual,capable
of achieving visual effects that a MAP cannot reproduce, although this particular chapter only
used full-plane mode. On the other hand, and more importantly: a large map with no repe-
titions exists, above all, to define the level’s playable design (what obstacles there are and
where),whileabackgroundispurelydecorativeanddoesn’tneedthatsamelevelofdetail. A
512×256-pixelimagethatrepeatsindefinitelyisusuallymorethanenoughforabackground,
without spending extra memory on a full map that was never going to provide any relevant
gameplay information.
Review exercises
1. Explainwhyassigningnew_camera_xdirectlytob_hscrollproduceshorizontalscrolling
in the wrong direction, and what operation fixes it.
2. Whyisbitshifting(>>)preferredoverdivisionforreducingthespeedofaparallaxback-
ground?
3. If b_hscroll is calculated as (0 - new_camera_x) >> 2, at what fraction of the fore-
ground’s speed is the background scrolling?
167

=== PAGE 174 ===
4. Explain why a background image that is 256 pixels tall needs its vertical scrolling
clamped to a range of just 32 pixels when the screen is 224 pixels tall.
5. Mention at least one reason why, in most cases, it’s better to use an IMAGE resource for
the background instead of a second MAP resource.
168

=== PAGE 175 ===
Chapter 26 — Transparency with
Shadow and Highlight
TheMegaDrivehasnogenuinewayofblendingcolorstoachievetransparency,thewaymore
modern consoles can with alpha layers. What the VDP does have is a special mode called
Shadow and Highlight, which darkens or lightens certain colors on screen in a controlled
way. Manycommercialgamestookadvantageofthismodetosimulatetransparency,lighting,
shadows, and ghosts, even though it isn’t real transparency in any technical sense.
It’s a feature with a reputation for being esoteric and hard to understand, but the program-
ming side of it is actually quite simple: enabling the mode takes a single line of code. The
real difficulty lies in understanding the particular rules that govern its behavior — which
palette is affected, which colors within that palette, and how it interacts with tile priority —
so you can make the most of it without surprises. This chapter covers those rules through a
smallpracticeproject: aghostthatcanturntranslucentagainstthebackgroundofahaunted
kitchen.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to be clear on two concepts already covered in this manual:
• The concept of the Mega Drive’s color palettes (PAL0 through PAL3, with the first color
of each palette reserved as transparent), covered in Chapter 2.
• The tile priority parameter (TILE_ATTR_FULL / TILE_ATTR), covered in Chapter 15.
1. Starting point: a background and two sprites
The project for this chapter starts out already with a haunted kitchen background and two
sprites loaded in resources.res: a ghost (spectre_sprite) and a sprite meant purely as a
visual palette reference (sh_palette_sprite), which is nothing more than a strip of colors
drawn specifically to clearly show the effect on each individual color. Handling both sprites
on screen and the D-pad controls to move them are already taken care of beforehand, so the
focus of this chapter is entirely on palette design and the effect itself.
The project’s resources.res file, with the kitchen background and the two starting sprites:
the ghost and the reference palette strip.
169

=== PAGE 176 ===
Figure 79: resources.res with the kitchen background and the starting sprites
2. The key palette: how to design a sprite for Shadow and
Highlight
The most important aspect of this chapter isn’t the code itself, but how each sprite’s color
palette is designed. The first color of the palette, as always on the Mega Drive, is ignored
and acts as the sprite’s transparent background color (it’s a good idea to draw it in a bright,
eye-catching color like blue, just so it’s clear where the actual artwork ends during editing).
The next thirteen colors are normal colors, which behave exactly the same as in any palette
without Shadow and Highlight enabled.
It’s the last two colors of the palette, color 15 and color 16, that have special behavior:
• Color 15 is used as the highlight.
• Color 16 is used as the shadow.
What matters about these two colors isn’t the hue assigned to them in the palette, but only
their position (15 and 16); they can, in principle, be any color at all, although it’s worth
picking hues that make the effect easier to visualize while testing.
The reference palette strip: the first color (blue) is transparent, the next thirteen are normal
colors, and the last two are the positions reserved for highlight and shadow.
3. Placeholder fill colors in the ghost sprite
In the ghost sprite, palette positions 15 and 16 can initially be filled with any flat color as a
placeholder,simplytooccupythosetwoindiceswhiletherestofthespriteisbeingdrawn. In
this project, the ghost’s white ends up taking the highlight slot, and the black of its outlines
and its own shadows takes the shadow slot. The only thing that matters at this point is the
positionofthosecolorswithinthepalette,nottheirapparenthueduringthedrawingprocess.
170

=== PAGE 177 ===
Figure80: Thereferencepalettestrip,withthetransparentcolor,thenormalcolors,andthe
highlight and shadow positions
4. Compiling with the mode disabled
Before turning anything on, it’s worth compiling the project as it stands, to establish a clear
point of comparison. Since Shadow and Highlight mode is disabled by default on the Mega
Drive, the result is as expected: both the background and both sprites look normal, with no
special effect yet, even though the palette is already set up for the mode.
Totesttheseeffectsproperly,it’sbesttodoso,asmuchaspossible,onrealhardwareoronan
emulatorthatreproducesthemodeaccurately—KegaFusionisareasonableoption—since
several popular emulators don’t simulate Shadow and Highlight behavior with full fidelity to
the original hardware. Chapter 4 reviews various emulator options and their quirks.
5. Enabling Shadow and Highlight with a single line
Enabling the mode itself is extremely simple: just a single line,
VDP_setHilightShadow(TRUE);
placedinsidemain()beforeenteringthegame’smainloop. PassingitFALSEdisablesitagain,
which is useful for turning the effect on and off dynamically during gameplay, for example
whenenteringandleavingadarkroom. Withthatlineadded,theresultchangesimmediately
upon compiling: the last two colors of any palette that has them defined start showing the
highlight and shadow effect.
171

=== PAGE 178 ===
6. Tile priority: how to keep an element’s original color
EnablingShadowandHighlightgloballydarkens,bydefault,everythingdrawnwithlowprior-
ity(FALSE),regardlessofwhetherthatelementactuallyhashighlightorshadowcolorsdefined
initspalette. Forabackgroundoraspritetokeepitsoriginalcolorswithoutbeingdarkened,
it needs to be explicitly marked with high priority (TRUE): for the background, within the pri-
ority parameter of VDP_drawImageEx() (or of TILE_ATTR_FULL, depending on how the tile is
built); for sprites, within TILE_ATTR() when calling SPR_addSprite().
Thisgraphicsmodehasareputationforhavingcausedmorethanoneheadachedur-
ingtheoriginaldevelopmentofMegaDriveandMegaCDgames: it’ssaid,without
any official confirmation, that some Mega CD release shipped with a scene meant
tobeshowninbroaddaylightinsteadappearingabnormallydark,asifShadowand
Highlight mode had been left enabled by mistake on elements without the correct
priority. Whetherornotthatparticularanecdoteisaccurate,itservesasareminder
thatthisparameterisworthcheckingcarefullybeforeconsideringascenefinished.
Going back to the chapter’s project, the priority parameter is set to TRUE for both the back-
ground and both sprites, so they keep their original colors despite having Shadow and High-
light enabled globally:
// Background with high priority: keeps its original colors
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, &kitchen_image,
TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, TRUE, FALSE, FALSE, TILE_USER_INDEX), 0, 0, FALSE, TRUE);
// Sprites with high priority: also keep their original colors
SPR_addSprite(spectre, x, y, TILE_ATTR(PAL2, TRUE, FALSE, FALSE));
SPR_addSprite(sh_palette, x2, y2, TILE_ATTR(PAL3, TRUE, FALSE, FALSE));
Compiling again, the screen regains its normal brightness on all the elements marked with
high priority, and now the highlight and shadow effect can be clearly seen on the reference
palette strip, since it does have valid colors defined in positions 15 and 16.
With the background and sprites now marked with high priority, the colors return to normal
and the highlight and shadow effect is clearly visible on the reference palette strip.
7. A key restriction: the effect only works on the fourth
palette (PAL3)
At this point, the ghost sprite shows no highlight or shadow effect at all, even though it also
hascolorsdefinedinpositions15and16ofitspalette. Thereasonisafundamentalhardware
restrictionofShadowandHighlightmode: theeffectonlytakesplaceontheMegaDrive’s
fourth palette, PAL3. Looking back at the project’s code, the reference palette strip (the
one that does show the effect) is assigned to PAL3, while the background uses PAL0, PAL1
isn’t used, and the ghost uses PAL2 — which is why it shows no effect.
This restriction is neither negotiable nor configurable: it’s a limitation of the VDP itself, and
it’s worth keeping in mind from the design stage of a project, since it effectively reserves an
entire palette (PAL3) for any element that needs this effect.
8. Swapping which sprite gets the effect
Toconfirmthisrestrictioninpractice,it’sillustrativetoswapthepaletteassignmentsbetween
the two sprites: the ghost switches to using PAL3, and the reference strip switches to using
172

=== PAGE 179 ===
Figure 81: The screen with high priority on the background and sprites, showing the effect
on the reference strip
PAL2. This means updating both the call to PAL_setPalette() (which copies the actual color
data to the corresponding hardware palette) and the palette parameter within TILE_ATTR()
in each sprite’s call to SPR_addSprite(), since both must match:
PAL_setPalette(PAL2, sh_palette_sprite.palette->data, DMA);
PAL_setPalette(PAL3, spectre_sprite.palette->data, DMA);
SPR_addSprite(spectre, x, y, TILE_ATTR(PAL3, TRUE, FALSE, FALSE));
SPR_addSprite(sh_palette, x2, y2, TILE_ATTR(PAL2, TRUE, FALSE, FALSE));
With the palettes now swapped, the result is reversed exactly as expected: the reference
palettestriplosestheeffectandgoesbacktoshowingnormalcolors,whiletheghost,nowon
PAL3,clearlyshowshighlightandshadowinthecorrespondingareasofitsartwork. Theghost
can now be partially “switched off” whenever needed, giving the impression of transparency
against the kitchen background.
After swapping palettes, the ghost — now on PAL3 — shows the highlight and shadow effect,
while the reference strip, on PAL2, goes back to displaying normal colors.
9. An additional limitation: which sprite covers which
There’sanimportantlimitationleftintheper-spritetransparencyeffect: iftwospritesoverlap
on screen, the one drawn “on top” completely covers the one underneath, with no real color
blending between them. It isn’t possible, for instance, for a semi-transparent sprite to show
through it whatever is on another sprite placed behind it; drawing order is decided solely
by the order in which each sprite was added with SPR_addSprite() in the code, and you can
confirm this by reversing that order to see how it changes which sprite ends up in front.
173

=== PAGE 180 ===
Figure 82: The ghost on PAL3 with the effect active, and the reference strip on PAL2 with
normal colors
SGDK does offer ways to reorder sprites dynamically at runtime — something essential, for
example, in a beat ’em up in the style of Streets of Rage, where drawing order depends on
each character’s vertical position on screen — but that topic is revisited later in this manual.
Review exercises
1. Explainspecificallywhatthecolorsinpositions15and16ofapalettesetupforShadow
and Highlight represent, and what happens with the thirteen colors before them.
2. Why did the ghost initially show no highlight or shadow effect, despite having colors
defined in the correct positions of its palette?
3. Explainthedualroleofthetilepriorityparameter(TILE_ATTR)inrelationtoShadowand
Highlight, and why that can cause complications in a real project.
4. What’s the relationship between marking an element with low priority and the risk of
an entire scene appearing darkened by mistake? Relate your answer to the restriction
described in section 6.
5. Describethelimitationoftheper-spritetransparencyeffectwhentwospritesoverlapon
screen, and what determines which of the two ends up in front.
174

=== PAGE 181 ===
Chapter 27 — Color Transparency
Without Shadow and Highlight
Flicker, mesh, and horizontal flip: three ways to simulate
transparency in any color
Chapter 26 showed how to use the VDP’s Shadow and Highlight mode (covered in detail in
Chapter2)tosimulatetransparency,butthatmodehastwoimportantlimitations. Thefirstis
about color: Shadow and Highlight can only darken (toward black) or lighten (toward white)
existingcolors,soifyouneedyellow,green,red,oranyothercoloredtransparency,thatmode
simply won’t do the job. The second is about overlap: as already shown, if a sprite with the
effect is drawn on top of another one, it completely covers it instead of casting a shadow or
highlight over it.
Thischaptercoversthreealternativetechniquesthatdon’trelyonShadowandHighlightand
thatletyousimulatetransparencyinanycolor: flicker,themeshpattern,andavariantofthe
mesh pattern that uses the sprite’s horizontal flip to disguise its grainy look.
Figure 83: An example of transparency in a commercial Mega Drive game
175

=== PAGE 182 ===
Sonic the Hedgehog 2 using color transparency, the kind of effect this chapter aims to repro-
duce without relying on Shadow and Highlight.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Read Chapter 26 (“Transparency with Shadow and Highlight”): this chapter builds on
the same base project, removing the line that enabled that mode.
• An understanding of the basic data types (in particular u8), covered in Chapter 6.
• Knowledge of how to assign palettes to sprites and backgrounds using more than one
palette at the same time, covered in Chapter 14.
1. Starting point: the same project, without Shadow and
Highlight
The code in this chapter picks up the same background and the same two sprites (the ghost
and the reference palette strip) from the previous chapter, with two differences: the back-
ground now uses two different palettes at once (the technique covered in Chapter 14), and
thelineVDP_setHilightShadow(TRUE)isremovedentirely,sincenoneofthetechniquesinthis
chapter depend on that mode.
The ghost is declared before the palette strip, so it appears drawn on top of it. With Shadow
and Highlight disabled, both sprites simply look like normal, opaque sprites, with no trans-
parency effect yet.
Figure 84: The background with two palettes and the two opaque sprites
The background with PAL0 and PAL1 active and the two sprites from the previous chapter,
now without Shadow and Highlight and still without any transparency effect.
176

=== PAGE 183 ===
2. First technique: flicker
The idea behind flicker is simple: if a sprite is made visible and invisible very quickly, alter-
nating frame by frame, the human eye perceives a blend between the sprite and whatever is
behind it, giving the impression of transparency. This effect looks better on an actual CRT
television than in a video recording or a screenshot, since a CRT’s image persistence and
refresh rate tend to smooth out the frame-by-frame alternation in a way that a camera or a
modern high-frequency display doesn’t always reproduce the same way.
Controlling that alternation requires a simple timer: a u8 variable (an unsigned 8-bit integer,
morethanenoughsinceitonlyneedstoalternatebetween0and1),initializedto0. It’sworth
organizing the flicker logic into a separate function, transparencyFunction(), declared with
its prototype before main() and defined at the end of the file, so it doesn’t get mixed in with
the rest of the main loop.
Inside that function, the key piece is SPR_setVisibility(), an SGDK function that takes the
sprite to affect and the desired state, using values of the SpriteVisibility type: VISIBLE to
show it and HIDDEN to hide it. The full logic alternates between two branches of an if: if the
timer is 0, the sprite is set visible and the timer is incremented by one; otherwise (that is, if
it’s 1), the sprite is set invisible and the timer is reset to 0. When writing this condition, be
careful not to confuse = (assignment) with == (comparison), an easy mistake to make even
though it’s a basic concept, and one that can leave the timer in an unexpected state without
the compiler warning you.
u8 timer = 0;
void transparencyFunction(void);
// ...
void transparencyFunction(void)
{
if (timer == 0)
{
SPR_setVisibility(spectre, VISIBLE);
timer++;
}
else
{
SPR_setVisibility(spectre, HIDDEN);
timer = 0;
}
}
Withthefunctionwritten, onelaststepremainsthat’seasytoforget: callingitoneverypass
of the game’s main loop, inside the while(TRUE), alongside the other per-frame update calls
(for example, reading input and SPR_update()).
The resulting behavior, frame by frame, is as follows: on the first frame the timer is 0, so
the sprite is set visible (no apparent change, since it already was) and the timer moves to 1;
on the second frame, since the timer is no longer 0, the sprite is set invisible; on the third
framethetimergoesbackto0andthecyclerepeats,alternatingvisibleandinvisibleoneach
successive frame.
The ghost alternating between visible and invisible frame by frame, letting the background
and the palette strip behind it show through.
177

=== PAGE 184 ===
Figure 85: The ghost flickering between visible and invisible
It’s worth keeping in mind that, when capturing or recording this effect to show it outside
of a CRT television, the result may not look as convincing as on real hardware, where the
frame-by-frame flicker tends to be perceived more smoothly and continuously. Even so, even
in a recording, the transparency effect is clearly noticeable.
3. A second example: a semi-transparent lamp, Streets of
Rage style
To test the same technique in a different context, it’s worth switching to a scene inspired by
the interiors of Streets of Rage, with a lamp sprite (simplified and reduced in size compared
to the original game, where it’s actually part of the background layer rather than a separate
sprite) and a basic animation of a character walking behind it.
Before applying any effect, it’s worth confirming the starting point: with the call to trans-
parencyFunction() temporarily commented out inside the main loop, the lamp sprite looks
like a solid, opaque yellow color, with no effect applied yet.
The lamp with no effect applied yet: a solid, opaque yellow.
Re-enabling the call to the function (now adapted to the lamp variable instead of spectre,
sincewedon’twantthecharacterbehindittoflicker)producesalampwithaconvincinglook
of yellow semi-transparency, something Shadow and Highlight could never have achieved,
being limited to black and white.
With the flicker function applied to lamp, the lamp looks semi-transparent in a yellow shade
that Shadow and Highlight couldn’t reproduce.
178

=== PAGE 185 ===
Figure 86: The lamp sprite as a solid color
Figure 87: The lamp flickering with yellow semi-transparency
179

=== PAGE 186 ===
4. Second technique: the mesh pattern
Theoriginalgamethatinspiredthisexample,StreetsofRage,doesn’tuseflickerforitssemi-
transparentlamp,butratherameshpattern: insteadofasolidcolor,thesprite’sowngraphic
is drawn with a pattern of alternating pixels (a checkerboard-style dithering), so that the
background color visually shows through the gaps in that pattern with no software trickery
needed at all.
It’s often mentioned that the Sega Saturn, generations later, has a dedicated hardware com-
mand for automatically converting a solid sprite into this kind of mesh pattern; this claim
could not be confirmed against technical documentation for that console, so it should be
taken with caution. In any case, the Mega Drive has nothing equivalent: the sprite’s own
graphic must already be drawn with the mesh built in from the start, in the graphics editor,
before converting it into an SGDK resource.
Figure 88: The lamp sprite redrawn with a mesh pattern
The lamp redrawn with a pattern of alternating pixels instead of a solid color, the technique
used by the original Streets of Rage.
The visual result of a mesh pattern depends heavily on the hardware or video filter used to
display it. With certain smoothing filters enabled in an emulator, the effect looks reasonably
convincing;turningthemoff,togetclosertowhatyou’dseewithacrispconnectionlikeRGB
on a real CRT, the pattern shows up as hard lines and the sense of transparency is lost. An
older or lower-quality connection, like RF, slightly blurs the whole image and, in the process,
also softens the mesh (historical examples of this phenomenon include the waterfall in Sonic
the Hedgehog, or, fittingly, the lamps in Streets of Rage). It’s a trade-off: a sharp image with
a very visible mesh, or a somewhat blurry image with a more disguised mesh. Since this
perception changes depending on the television or emulator, it’s worth testing the effect in
more than one environment before settling on it.
Combining this mesh pattern with the flicker technique from the previous section is also
possible, andgives an acceptable result, though not necessarily better thaneither technique
180

=== PAGE 187 ===
on its own.
5. Third technique: horizontal flip over the mesh pattern
There’s a variant that tends to give a more even result than the mesh pattern combined with
flicker: instead of alternating the sprite between visible and invisible, it’s kept visible at all
times, but flipped horizontally on every other frame using SPR_setHFlip(), another SGDK
function already used in earlier chapters of Part III. Since the mesh pattern isn’t perfectly
symmetrical, flipping it back and forth frame by frame makes the light areas and the pat-
terned areas seem to constantly swap positions, producing a smoother transparency effect
than simply flickering the whole sprite.
The change from the flicker technique is minimal: SPR_setVisibility() is replaced with
SPR_setHFlip() inside the same two branches of the if.
void transparencyFunction(void)
{
if (timer == 0)
{
SPR_setHFlip(lamp, FALSE);
timer++;
}
else
{
SPR_setHFlip(lamp, TRUE);
timer = 0;
}
}
Compilingwiththischange,theresultisusuallyconsideredthemostconvincingofthethree
techniques presented in this chapter for this kind of effect: the lamp looks evenly semi-
transparent, without the abrupt flicker of the first technique or the fixed visual harshness
of the static mesh pattern from the second. As with any comparison of this sort, the final
impression can vary depending on the television or emulator used to view it, so it’s worth
tryingallthreevariantsonthetargethardwareoremulatorbeforedecidingwhichonetouse
in a given project.
The lamp with a mesh pattern alternating its horizontal flip frame by frame: the most even
result of the three techniques.
Nothing stops you, moreover, from combining these techniques with Shadow and Highlight
withinthesameproject: forexample,usingShadowandHighlightforthepartsofaspritethat
need to look truly black or white in a transparent way, and one of this chapter’s techniques
for any other color. Which combination works best in each case depends on the visual needs
of the game in question.
Review exercises
1. Explain the two limitations of Shadow and Highlight (Chapter 26) that motivate looking
for alternative transparency techniques like the ones in this chapter.
2. Describestepbystep,framebyframe,howthetimervariableandtheSPR_setVisibility()
function produce the flicker effect.
3. Whydoesn’tameshpatterndrawndirectlyontothespriterequireanyspecialhardware
support on the Mega Drive?
181

=== PAGE 188 ===
Figure 89: The lamp alternating its horizontal flip
4. Explain why the same mesh pattern can look very different depending on the type of
video connection (RGB versus RF) used on a CRT television, and why this observation
shouldn’t be generalized without qualification to any television or emulator.
5. Why does alternating the horizontal flip of a sprite with a mesh pattern tend to produce
a more even effect than simply flickering the whole sprite?
182

=== PAGE 189 ===
Chapter 28 — Ranger X-Style
Dynamic Lighting
Chapters26and27coveredtwowaystosimulatetransparencyoversprites: firstwithShadow
andHighlight, thenwithalternativesoftwaretechniquesbasedonflickerandmeshpatterns.
This chapter returns to Shadow and Highlight, but this time applies it to the background
layers instead of individual sprites, in order to reproduce one of the most memorable effects
in the Mega Drive library: the light beams from Ranger X, which illuminate both the stage
and the player’s own robot as it passes beneath them. Another famous example of this same
technique is the stained-glass section in Castlevania: Bloodlines.
Unlike the version seen in Chapter 26, where priority was assigned sprite by sprite, here the
switch is the priority of the background tiles themselves: any tile marked with high priority
is shown with increased brightness, and any sprite that passes over that area is lit up along
with it. This difference brings one advantage (a single change lights up the background and
everything passing over it) and one new complication, because tile priority doesn’t only con-
trol Shadow and Highlight: it also decides the draw order between layers and sprites, and
the two functions can conflict with each other.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it’s worth having these points settled:
• The basic rules of Shadow and Highlight — PAL3 reserved for sprites with high-
light/shadow,colors15and16reservedforthosestates,andthecalltoVDP_setHilightShadow()
— were already covered in Chapter 26 and are assumed to be known here.
• Handling two background layers (BG_A and BG_B) and the concept of tile priority, pre-
sented in Chapter 15.
• Creating and importing maps with per-tile priority using 16Tile, covered in Chapter 13.
1. Starting point: a robot over a background with several
light sources
This chapter’s practice project uses, as its character, a sprite inspired by the robot from
Ranger X, over a simplified stage that revisits the setting of Revenge of Shinobi, chosen be-
causeitincludesseverallightsourceswellsuitedtothiseffect. Whenworkingwiththistype
of lighting, it’s also best not to exceed a map that’s 512 pixels wide by 256 pixels tall: larger
maps can cause performance problems, which are revisited later in this manual.
Thelayerstructurecomesalreadysetup: aregularbackgroundassignedtoPAL0anddrawn
on the BG_B layer with VDP_drawImageEx() (Chapter 7), and a foreground built in 16Tile,
183

=== PAGE 190 ===
loaded with MAP_create() and assigned to the BG_A layer using PAL1. Since the effect is
going to be turned on, both the background and the foreground must start with all their
prioritysettoFALSE(low),sothatShadowandHighlightcanlaterdarkenorlightenthemtile
by tile:
#define MAP_WIDTH 512
#define MAP_HEIGHT 256
// Regular background on PAL0 / BG_B, starting low priority
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, &background_image, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE,
↪ TILE_USER_INDEX), 0, 0, FALSE, TRUE);
// Foreground on PAL1 / BG_A, with per-tile priority already defined in 16Tile
Map* foreground = MAP_create(&foreground_map, BG_A, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL1, FALSE,
↪ FALSE, FALSE, TILE_USER_INDEX + background_image.tileset->numTile));
Therobot’ssprite,foritspart,isalreadyassignedtoPAL2withlowpriority,andtheprojectin-
cludestheVDP_setHilightShadow(TRUE)lineneededtoturnthemodeon. Therest—controls,
camera, and map scrolling — follows the same pattern already covered in previous chapters.
2. The foreground map in 16Tile: everything at low priority
The foreground is built beforehand in 16Tile with a tileset inspired by Revenge of Shinobi.
All of its tiles are assigned to PAL1 and, to start, all of them have their priority set to low.
Building the project at this point, the result is a completely darkened scene: since Shadow
andHighlightisalreadyactivebutnothinghashighpriority,thebackground,theforeground,
and the robot’s own sprite all appear equally darkened.
Figure 90: The priority layer in 16Tile, all set to low, alongside the on-screen result
With the entire priority layer in magenta (low), background, foreground, and sprite are all
184

=== PAGE 191 ===
equally darkened.
3. Painting the first light source at high priority
The first concrete step is to paint, within 16Tile, only the tiles directly under the stage’s first
lamp at high priority. With this change the intended effect already shows up: that area of
the background looks noticeably brighter than the rest, and the same happens to the robot’s
spriteasitpassesunderneath,becauseShadowandHighlightappliedtothebackgroundalso
affects any sprite located over an area marked at high priority.
Figure91: Theareaunderthefirstlampalreadymarkedathighpriority,withthebackground
and the robot lit up as they pass underneath
By marking those tiles at high priority, both the background and the robot light up while
passing through that area.
4. A color the effect doesn’t reach: palette position 15
Looking closely at the robot’s sprite as it passes under the lit area, there’s one detail that
doesn’t change brightness along with the rest: a small dot of color in its design. The cause
is an additional rule of the Shadow and Highlight mode applied to the background: for any
sprite, regardless of whether it uses PAL2 or PAL3, the color located at position 15 of its
palette is never affected by the effect. In this example, that dot was deliberately placed at
position 15 — a position not used in the original design — and position 16 was filled with
another color just to complete the 16-color palette.
Thereareatleastthreereasonablewaystodealwiththisrulewhendesigningaspritethat’s
going to receive the effect:
185

=== PAGE 192 ===
• Avoid using position 15 altogether, even if that means sacrificing an available palette
color.
• Accept that this particular color won’t be affected, when it takes up little space on the
sprite and is unlikely to be noticed during gameplay.
• Turn the limitation into a design asset: for example, a robot’s or an enemy’s glowing
eyescouldoccupyexactlyposition15,sothattheykeepstandingoutevenundershadow.
This is one option among the previous ones, not necessarily a better one, and it’s worth
choosing for whoever values that constant glow as part of the character’s design.
5. A difference from the original Ranger X: should the
player’s sprite be lit up?
Comparingtheresultobtainedsofarwiththeoriginalgamerevealsadifference: inRangerX,
the player’s own robot sprite isn’t affected by the lighting effect, and always keeps the same
brightness,whetherornotitpassesthroughalitarea. Thatbehaviorcanbereproducedwith
a single change: setting the robot sprite’s priority to high (TRUE) instead of low.
// High priority: the sprite is exempt from Shadow and Highlight
SPR_setAttribute(ranger, TILE_ATTR(PAL2, TRUE, FALSE, FALSE));
There’s no official confirmation of why the original game behaves this way, but there’s a
reasonable explanation: a player sprite that gets too dark under certain lights could make
it harder to see clearly during gameplay, so keeping it at a constant brightness would be a
design decision rather than a technical limitation. That said, the opposite stance is just as
valid: lettingtheplayer’ssprite(andtheenemies’sprites)beaffectedbytheeffecttoo,since
many consider it visually more appealing and it reinforces the feeling that the character is
part of the same lit space as the stage. Both are legitimate design decisions; for the rest of
this chapter, the robot’s priority is set back to low (FALSE), since lighting up the player’s own
sprite is the central goal of this technique.
6. Adding the remaining light sources
With the pattern already established, the rest of the stage’s lamps are added the same way:
painting,within16Tile,thetilesthatcorrespondtoeachadditionallightsourceathighprior-
ity. Working over a dark background inside the editor itself helps to more clearly distinguish
which tiles are already at high priority and which are still at low.
With the new lights already painted in, however, a different problem shows up next to the
second light source: part of a wall and a trash can from the foreground, which should be
drawn in front of the robot sprite, end up appearing behind it when passing through that
area.
The robot should pass in front of the wall and the trash can, but ends up covered by them.
7. The underlying conflict: priority serves two purposes at
once
The cause of this problem is the same limitation already explained in Chapter 15: the pri-
ority parameter of a tile or a sprite serves two purposes at the same time. On one hand, it
determines whether that element is affected by Shadow and Highlight; on the other, it also
determines the draw order between background layers and sprites, since any high-priority
186

=== PAGE 193 ===
Figure 92: The robot ending up hidden behind the wall and the trash can near the second
light source
tileisdrawninfrontofanylow-prioritysprite,withoutexception. Markingthewallandtrash
can tiles at high priority to light them up had a side effect: those same tiles started being
drawn in front of the robot sprite, which is still at low priority. It’s the same mechanism that,
appliedtheotherwayaround, letsacharactercorrectlystaybehindoneforegroundelement
and in front of another within the same scene with several overlapping layers.
8. The solution: replacing the conflicting foreground with
low-priority sprites
The chosen solution avoids sacrificing either the lighting effect or the correct draw order:
within 16Tile, the foreground tiles causing the conflict — the wall and the right side of the
trash can — are removed and replaced with the transparent tile, so that the background
becomes directly visible in that area.
Atthispointthelightingeffectalreadyworkscorrectlyinthatarea,buttheactualdrawingof
the wall and the trash can, just removed from the foreground, is now missing. That’s where
the core of the solution comes in: instead of background tiles, those elements are recreated
asnewlow-prioritysprites,usingthesamegraphictheyhadaspartoftheforeground,placed
exactly where the removed tiles used to be.
// New sprites, using the same palette the foreground had (PAL1)
Sprite* ranger = SPR_addSprite(&sprite_ranger, x, y, TILE_ATTR(PAL2, FALSE, FALSE,
↪ FALSE));
Sprite* wall = SPR_addSprite(&sprite_wall, wallX, wallY, TILE_ATTR(PAL1,
↪ FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
Sprite* bin = SPR_addSprite(&sprite_bin, binX, binY, TILE_ATTR(PAL1, FALSE,
↪ FALSE, FALSE));
187

=== PAGE 194 ===
Since these new sprites remain at low priority, just like the player’s robot, they are indeed
subjecttoShadowandHighlightandlightupalongwiththerestofthesceneunderthatlamp.
Being sprites just like the robot itself, moreover, the draw order between them is controlled
normally, without the previous conflict between background tile and sprite.
It’s best to add the robot sprite first and only afterward the new wall and trash can sprites,
so that the robot ends up correctly in front of them when it should: the order in which
SPR_addSprite() is called determines which sprite is drawn in front of which. It’s also nec-
essary to update the position of these sprites within the camera function, just like with any
other element that needs to scroll along with the map.
Replacing foreground tiles with sprites solves the conflict between lighting and
draw order, but it comes at a cost: each element turned into a sprite starts com-
peting for the same hardware resources as the rest of the sprites on screen. As
explained in Chapter 2, the Mega Drive can display around 80 simultaneous hard-
ware sprites before flicker starts showing up due to a lack of available slots on a
given scanline, so this resource should be used sparingly, and not every conflicting
foreground element should be turned into a sprite.
Withthesechanges,theproblemisresolved: thewallandtherightsideofthetrashcanonce
again appear in front of or behind the robot as appropriate, and all three light up correctly
when passing under the lamp.
9. Why the order of SPR_addSprite() matters
Tounderscoretheimportanceofthisorder,it’sworthdeliberatelytryingtoreverseit: adding
the robot sprite after the wall and trash can sprites, instead of before. With that change, the
player’srobotendsupdrawnbehindthetrashcaninsteadofinfrontofit,asitshouldbe,since
theorderof SPR_addSprite()directlydeterminestheorderofthehardwarespritetable,and
therefore what gets drawn over what. Reversing the order back — leaving the robot sprite
as the first one added — restores the correct result.
Review exercises
1. ExplainthemainadvantageofapplyingShadowandHighlighttothebackgroundinstead
of to individual sprites, and contrast it with the approach seen in Chapter 26.
2. Which palette position of a sprite is always exempt from the Shadow and Highlight ef-
fect applied to the background, and what design strategies exist for dealing with that
limitation?
3. Explain the conflict that arises when marking the tiles of a foreground element that
should be drawn in front of a sprite at high priority, and why it happens.
4. Describe the solution applied to resolve that conflict, noting what care must be taken
with the order of SPR_addSprite() and with the limit on simultaneous hardware sprites.
5. Mention at least two limitations that Shadow and Highlight applied to the background
shares with the version applied to individual sprites.
188

=== PAGE 195 ===
Chapter 29 — Palette Cycling
Animations
Palettecyclingwasaverycommontechniqueinthe16-biteraforbringingbackgroundstolife:
itwasusedtosimulatemovingwaterorfire,day-to-nightlightingtransitions,orsci-fiflickers.
Itsappealisn’tjustvisual. Sinceitdoesn’trequireextratilesinVRAMorupdatingthemframe
byframe,it’sanextremelycheaptechniqueintermsofsystemresources,andcombinedwith
other hardware tricks it can even contribute to pseudo-3D effects. This chapter covers how
to prepare graphics for this technique, how to program it in SGDK using PAL_setPalette(),
and how to get a quick preview of the effect in Aseprite before writing a single line of code.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, make sure you’re clear on:
• The use of PAL_setPalette() and loading a background image with VDP_drawImageEx(),
aswellashowCRAMisorganizedinto16-colorbanks(chap.2,“TheVDPinDepth”)and
how a background is displayed for the first time (chap. 7, “Displaying Backgrounds on
the Mega Drive”).
• Working with integer-based timers inside the main loop and the signed types s8/s16
(chap. 6, “C Applied to Retro Development”).
• How to work with indexed color mode in Aseprite (chap. 8, “Creating Graphics with
Aseprite”).
• How to extract a function from the main loop by declaring its prototype before main(),
a pattern already used in previous chapters on animation.
1. A conceptual starting point: “8-bit art”
Before diving into the code, it’s worth keeping in mind an idea that runs through much of
classic pixel art for animated backgrounds: the so-called “8-bit art,” understood not as a
reference to a system or console, but to the number of colors shown on screen: 256 in total.
Displaying that many simultaneous colors on the Mega Drive would require an add-on like
the 32X, but even with the 61 colors effectively available on the base console (four palettes
of 16 colors, with index 0 of each reserved for transparency), very convincing effects can be
achieved using palette cycling. The key is building the original artwork with color shifting
in mind from the start, so that the palette change reads as a smooth animation rather than
a simple pixel flicker. Achieving this is, above all, a palette design problem rather than a
programming one.
The“CanvasCycle”demo,with256colorsonscreenusingonlypalettecyclingoveracoastal
landscape.
189

=== PAGE 196 ===
Figure 93: Canvas Cycle, Mark Ferrari’s demo
2. Preparing the graphics: a background with an indexed
palette
The example in this chapter uses as its base a waterfall background, edited in Aseprite with
the color mode set to indexed (not RGB, as explained in the chapter on creating graphics
withAseprite),anessentialrequirementforbeingabletomanipulatepalettepositionsdirectly
insteadofthecolorofeachpixel. Thefirstcolorinthepalettecorrespondstothebackground
black,andthecolorsrelevanttotheeffectarethewhites,greens,andbluesthatmakeupthe
waterfall.
The waterfall background in indexed color mode, with the corresponding palette visible in
the left panel.
The advantage of palette cycling is that, instead of keeping many unique tiles in VRAM that
have to be swapped out to create an animation, it’s enough to shift the colors within the
palette positions to achieve the same visual effect. This can be verified right in Aseprite:
if you move the white color to the first position of the palette (for example, undoing and
redoing the change with Ctrl+Z/Ctrl+Y to compare before and after), the waterfall gives the
impression of movement, since all the colors in the gradient shift one position. Repeating
that shift several times completes the entire animation cycle.
Aftershiftingthecolorsbyoneposition,thewaterfall’swateralreadyshowsslightmovement
compared to the original state.
3. Saving each step of the cycle as a separate image
To keep the programming process as simple as possible, it’s better not to try to save the
palette animation as such, but instead to create a series of tiny images (8x8 pixels, i.e., a
190

=== PAGE 197 ===
Figure 94: The waterfall background in Aseprite
Figure 95: The waterfall palette after shifting a color
191

=== PAGE 198 ===
single tile), each with a slightly different (shifted) version of the waterfall’s palette. These
images aren’t used for their graphical content: they serve solely as containers from which
SGDK can read the palette data corresponding to each step of the cycle.
Thefirstfileissavedwiththepaletteinitsoriginalposition(inindexedcolormode,exported
asPNG);then,foreachsubsequentstep,thepaletteisshiftedonepositionfurtherandsaved
under a different filename, until seven files in total are completed, one for each step of this
waterfall’s full cycle. The number of steps depends directly on how many colors make up
thegradientyouwanttoanimate: awaterfallwithsevenrelevanttonesneedssevenstepsto
complete a full cycle.
4. The starting point in SGDK
The example project already includes the seven 8x8 images just described and the waterfall
background, all declared in resources.res. The background is called BG1, and each of the
small palette images is named PC0 through PC6 (from “palette cycle”):
IMAGE BG1 "gfx/shinobi_waterfall.png" NONE
IMAGE PC0 "gfx/pc0.png" NONE
IMAGE PC1 "gfx/pc1.png" NONE
IMAGE PC2 "gfx/pc2.png" NONE
IMAGE PC3 "gfx/pc3.png" NONE
IMAGE PC4 "gfx/pc4.png" NONE
IMAGE PC5 "gfx/pc5.png" NONE
IMAGE PC6 "gfx/pc6.png" NONE
Thestartingcodeinmain.cisdeliberatelysimple: itloadsthepaletteanddrawsthewaterfall
background on the BG_B layer, with no animation yet, just as was done when displaying a
background for the first time in chapter 7:
#include <genesis.h>
#include "resources.h"
int main(bool hardReset) {
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, &BG1, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE,
↪ TILE_USER_INDEX), 0, 0, FALSE, TRUE);
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, BG1.palette->data, DMA);
while (TRUE) {
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return 0;
}
Compiling at this point results in a completely static waterfall.
5. Creating the palette cycle timer
The first step in animating the effect is to create a timer: an integer variable called
palette_timer, initialized to 0 and declared before int main() so it can also be used inside
a separate function later on. As is typical with this kind of timer (chap. 6), it’s incremented
192

=== PAGE 199 ===
once per pass through the main loop using palette_timer++ (equivalent to palette_timer
+= 1), so its value advances from 0 to 1, 2, 3, and so on, once per frame.
static s16 palette_timer = 0;
int main(bool hardReset) {
// ...
while (TRUE) {
palette_timer++;
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return 0;
}
6. Changing the palette based on the timer
To make something happen when the timer reaches a given value, if statements are used
to compare palette_timer against a specific number. In the first step (when palette_timer
equals 0), the same PAL_setPalette() function already familiar from previous chapters on
backgrounds is used, but instead of taking the palette data from the background itself, it’s
takenfromoneofthesmallPC0toPC6imagescreatedearlier(inthiscase,PC0,thepalettein
its original position).
Fromthere,therestofthesequenceisbuiltwiththesamechainedelse ifpattern,deciding
howmanyframesshouldpassbeforethecycleadvances(tenframesinthisexample,i.e.,one-
sixth of a second at 60 frames per second) and changing, at each step, both the comparison
number and the palette file used: PC0 at frame 0, PC1 at frame 10, PC2 at frame 20, and so on
up to PC6 at frame 60:
if (palette_timer == 0)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC0.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 10)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC1.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 20)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC2.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 30)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC3.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 40)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC4.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 50)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC5.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 60)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC6.palette->data, DMA);
7. Restarting the cycle and choosing the right data type
With the seven conditions now in place, one problem remains: palette_timer will keep in-
crementing indefinitely past 60, with no condition set up to handle those future values. If it
had been declared as int (a 32-bit integer), the timer would take an extremely long time to
overflowandwrapbackto0onitsown,soinpracticethecyclewouldneverrestartnaturally.
193

=== PAGE 200 ===
The solution is to add an eighth condition that, upon reaching a reference value, manually
resets the timer.
There’s an important detail about how to reset it: since palette_timer++ runs at the end
of every pass through the loop, after all the if comparisons, assigning palette_timer = 0
directly in that condition would mean that, after the subsequent increment, the timer would
endupat1onthenextframe, completelyskippingthe palette_timer == 0 conditionandits
PC0palette. Thesolutionistoassignpalette_timer = -1instead,sothat,aftertheincrement,
the value effectively ends up at 0 for the following frame, closing the cycle correctly:
else if (palette_timer == 70)
palette_timer = -1;
There’s no fixed answer regarding the exact reference value for the reset (70 in
the example above): shifting that point to 69 could, in theory, produce a slightly
more even transition between the last step of the cycle and the first, but there’s
no definitive reason to prefer one value over the other. It’s worth trying both (69
and70)experimentallyonyourownprojectandkeepingwhicheverlookssmoother,
rather than assuming one is “the correct” one.
This need for a transient negative value also affects the data type used for palette_timer:
since int is a 32-bit integer, that’s more space than is needed for this purpose. An s8 (an
8-bit signed integer, roughly -128 to 127) would be more than enough for a 70-frame cycle,
but it’s better to use s16 (a 16-bit signed integer, with a range of several thousand in both
directions) as a more flexible option in case higher timer values are needed in the future (for
longerorslowercycles, forexample), withoutgoingaslargeasa32-bitint. Inanycase, the
essential point is that the chosen type must be signed, since without that, the -1 assignment
wouldn’t have the intended effect.
8. Compiling the result and extracting a function
Once saved and compiled, the resulting effect strongly resembles a waterfall animated by
movingwater. Whenreconstructingthepaletteofanexistingcommercialgamefrommemory
orfromascreenshot,it’snormalnottoachieveaperfectmatchwiththeoriginal: it’senough
for the result to be visually convincing for your own project. The effect looks even better
once foreground elements and sprites are added in front of the waterfall. By changing the
numbersusedintheconditions(boththeintervalbetweenframechangesandtheresetpoint),
the perceived speed of the cycle can be adjusted, faster or slower as the design requires.
Finally, since keeping all this palette-changing code directly inside the main loop is untidy,
it’s worth extracting it into a separate function, following the same pattern already used in
previous chapters: a prototype declared before main(), the function body defined afterward,
and a single call to that function inside the main loop:
#include <genesis.h>
#include "resources.h"
static s16 palette_timer = 0;
static void paletteCycler();
int main(bool hardReset) {
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, &BG1, TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE,
↪ TILE_USER_INDEX), 0, 0, FALSE, TRUE);
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, BG1.palette->data, DMA);
194

=== PAGE 201 ===
while (TRUE) {
paletteCycler();
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return 0;
}
static void paletteCycler() {
if (palette_timer == 0)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC0.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 10)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC1.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 20)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC2.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 30)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC3.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 40)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC4.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 50)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC5.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 60)
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, PC6.palette->data, DMA);
else if (palette_timer == 70)
palette_timer = -1;
palette_timer++;
}
9. Quick preview in Aseprite before programming
BeforebuildingafullpalettecycleinSGDK,itcanbeusefultogetaquickpreviewoftheeffect
directly in Aseprite, without going through the file-creation and coding process described in
the previous sections yet. Aseprite doesn’t natively offer a dedicated feature for this, but it
doessupportcommunityscriptsthatextenditsfunctionality: therearescriptsofthiskindthat
automate palette cycling animation right in the editor, generating several animation frames
(each with the palette shifted one step) from a range of color indices specified by the user.
It’s worth looking up the current version of such a script in the Aseprite community before
using it, since its availability and installation method may change over time.
Generallyspeaking,installinganAsepritescriptinvolvesdownloadingit,copyingthefileinto
theprogram’sscriptsfolder(accessiblefromFile>Scripts>OpenScriptsFolder),andthen
going to File > Scripts > Rescan Scripts Folder so Aseprite recognizes it. A typical palette
cyclescriptasksfortheindexnumbersofthecolorstocycle(countingfromtheleft, starting
at0)and,onceconfirmed,automaticallygeneratesthecorrespondingframes,lettingyouplay
them back right inside Aseprite to preview the effect before exporting anything.
The dialog box of the Colour Cycle script, with the color indices to cycle entered and the
buttons to generate the frames.
If a script like this produces no visible result, the most likely cause is that the file is still in
RGBcolormodeinsteadofindexed(chap.8),sothatsettingshouldbecheckedandcorrected
195

=== PAGE 202 ===
Figure 96: Dialog box of the Colour Cycle script
before repeating the process. The speed of the resulting animation can usually be adjusted
by selecting all the generated frames and using the Properties option from the context menu
(right-click) to change the duration of each frame.
Tools of this kind typically don’t automatically generate the palette files that SGDK needs
(themanualprocessdescribedinsections2and3ofthischapter): theymainlyserveasquick
visual prototyping within Aseprite, before investing time in programming the full effect.
Review exercises
1. Explain why palette cycling is cheaper in resources than animating individual tiles to
achieve a similar effect.
2. Describe the procedure for preparing the image files that PAL_setPalette() will use at
each step of the cycle.
3. Why must the timer reset to -1 rather than 0 in the cycle’s final condition? Explain the
role of the order of operations (the increment happening after the comparisons) in that
decision.
4. Whyisitbettertouseans16typeratherthanintforpalette_timer,andwhatroledoes
the data type’s signedness play in that decision?
5. Modifythischapter’sexamplesothecycleresetsatframe69insteadof70,andcompare
bothresultsbyeye. Doyounoticeanyrealdifferenceinthesmoothnessofthetransition?
196

=== PAGE 203 ===
Chapter 30 — Palette Fades
Thepreviouschaptercoveredpalettecycling: atechniqueforanimatingascenebyrepeatedly
alternating between several pre-prepared palettes. This chapter closes out Part III with a
related but distinct technique: instead of assigning palettes directly and immediately with
PAL_setPalette(), the color data is taken, stored in an array in RAM, and that array is used
togetherwithSGDK’sPAL_fadeIn()functiontomakethepaletteappeargraduallyfromblack,
rather than all at once.
Thepracticalgoalistoeliminatethe“flicker”orabrupt-loadeffectthatoftenoccurswhenthe
differentgraphicalelementsofascreen(background,foreground,sprites)loadtheirpalettes
in a staggered way that’s visible to the player. Many commercial games solve exactly this
detail so that a level’s opening screen looks polished instead of improvised.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to be clear on:
• The use of PAL_setPalette() to assign palettes to different planes and sprites from
graphicresourcesdefinedinresources.res(Chapter7,“Displayingbackgroundsonthe
Mega Drive”).
• TheconceptofCRAMastheVDP’scolormemory,withitsfourpalettesof16colorseach
(Chapter 2, “The VDP in depth”).
• TheconceptofanarrayinCasastructurecapableofstoringmultiplevaluesofthesame
type under a single name.
• SGDK’s build cycle via resources.res and resource generation.
• Basic handling of a graphics editor in indexed color mode (for example, Aseprite).
1. The problem: a staggered, visible palette load
A simple beat ’em up–style example serves as a starting point, with four palettes assigned
independently via PAL_setPalette(): one for the background (PAL0), another for the fore-
ground (PAL1), another for the player sprite (PAL2), and another for the enemy sprite (PAL3),
each pulling its color data from its own graphic resource.
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, background_image.palette->data, DMA);
PAL_setPalette(PAL1, foreground_image.palette->data, DMA);
PAL_setPalette(PAL2, player_sprite.palette->data, DMA);
PAL_setPalette(PAL3, enemy_sprite.palette->data, DMA);
ReloadingtheROMrepeatedlyintheemulatorshowsthattheentrytransitionlooksnoticeably
staggered: the background appears first, and then, with a slight offset, the foreground and
the sprites follow. The result feels unpolished. If instead the whole graphic set appeared
197

=== PAGE 204 ===
through a slow fade from black, the transition would look far more deliberate, and that’s the
effect built in this chapter.
2. Consolidating the four palettes into a single image
The first step is to comment out (disable) the four PAL_setPalette() calls used so far, since
they’ll be replaced by a different mechanism based on an array.
Instead of maintaining four independent palettes, the technique consists of storing all 64
availablecolors(16colorsforeachoftheMegaDrive’s4palettes)withinthepaletteofasingle
image — in this case, the background image. That image’s palette is expanded to 64 slots —
16perrow—sothatthefirstrowcorrespondstowhatwouldbePAL0,thesecondrowtoPAL1,
the third to PAL2, and the fourth to PAL3. The procedure essentially consists of copying and
pasting, in the graphics editor, the colors from the palettes of the other images (foreground,
player sprite, enemy sprite) into the corresponding rows of the background image’s palette.
Figure 97: Consolidated palette of the background image, with 64 colors in four rows of 16
The full consolidated palette, showing the range from 0 to 63 with the four rows of 16 colors
corresponding to the four original palettes.
Eachpalettemustoccupyexactlyitsrowof16colors, eveniftheoriginalgraphicusesfewer
colorsthanareavailable: theleftoverslotsarefilledwithblackoranotherfillercolor,andare
neverleftoutoforder,becauseotherwisethecolorsfromthedifferentpaletteswouldendup
mixed and misaligned relative to the indices the code will later use.
If the background image was already loaded previously in resources.res, SGDK
only regenerates resources when it detects a change in that file, or when a full
rebuild (clean) is requested. So, after modifying only the palette of an already-
existing image, it’s a good idea to force resource regeneration by adding and then
removing any character in resources.res (saving both times), or by doing a full
198

=== PAGE 205 ===
project clean before rebuilding. Otherwise, the ROM will keep using the previous
palette data.
3. Creating the array and copying the color data with mem-
cpy()
The next step takes place in main.c: an array is created that can hold the 64 color values.
Since each color is represented as an unsigned 16-bit integer, the array is declared as u16,
withadescriptivenameandasizeof64slots,declaredbeforemain()justlikeanyotherglobal
variable.
u16 our_level_palette[64];
To move the color data from the background image into that array in RAM, memcpy() is used
— a standard C function (not specific to SGDK) that copies blocks of memory and takes three
parameters: the copy destination, the copy source, and the number of bytes to copy.
memcpy(&our_level_palette[0], background_image.palette->data, 64 * 2);
The first parameter is the destination: the name of the array just created, preceded by the &
symbol (memory address) and with [0] as the starting position, since the write should begin
at the start of the array. The second parameter is the source of the data: taken from the
backgroundimage’spalette,usingthesameexpressionusedearliertoassignpalettesdirectly,
i.e., background_image.palette->data.
The third and final parameter indicates the size of the data to transfer, expressed in bytes.
Since each color takes up two bytes, it’s worth writing 64 * 2 explicitly rather than 128,
precisely to make the math itself document the fact that each of the 64 colors occupies two
bytesofdata. Theresultisequivalenttowriting128directly,butthe64 * 2formreadsbetter
as implicit documentation of the calculation.
At this point, the our_level_palette array already holds the color data in RAM, but that
copy by itself has no visible effect on screen: memcpy() only moves bytes in memory, without
interacting at all with the VDP or with the console’s active palette.
4. Applying the fade with PAL_fadeIn()
For the color data stored in the array to actually affect what’s shown on screen, and to do
so through a gradual transition, SGDK’s PAL_fadeIn() function is used, documented as an
effect that makes a palette appear gradually from black to the specified color (fade in, black
to specified color effect):
void PAL_fadeIn(u16 fromCol, u16 toCol, const u16 *pal, u16 numFrame, bool async);
The function takes five parameters:
• fromCol: the starting color index of the fade, within the range 0-63. Since the consol-
idated palette holds 64 colors in total, and each original palette (PAL0 through PAL3)
occupies 16 consecutive slots within that range (PAL0 from 0 to 15, PAL1 from 16 to 31,
andsoon),it’spossibletotreatthefadeasasinglecontinuousblockfrom0to63instead
of four separate blocks.
• toCol: the ending index of the fade, also within 0-63, and this last index is included in
the effect. To make all four palettes fade in at once from black, the values 0 and 63 are
used, covering all 64 colors (index 63 corresponds to the last of the palette’s 64 colors).
199

=== PAGE 206 ===
• pal: thesourceofthecolordata,i.e.,thenameofthearraycreatedearlier,withoutneed-
ing to prefix it with the & symbol or specify any position in brackets, since the function
expects a pointer to the whole array directly.
• numFrame: the duration of the fade expressed in frames. Since the Mega Drive runs at
60 frames per second (in the region used as the reference throughout this manual), a
value of 60 corresponds to one second of duration, 120 to two seconds, and 30 to half a
second.
• async: abooleanthatdetermineswhethertherestofthegame’sprocessescancontinue
while the fade is in progress (true), or whether, on the contrary, all other game logic
must wait for the fade to finish before continuing (false). For now it’s fine to leave it as
true; section 7 revisits this parameter in detail.
PAL_fadeIn(0, 63, our_level_palette, 60, true);
5. First test: the fade works, but with an initial flash
Withthe newPAL_fadeIn() callin place, the project is saved, built, and run. The fadecan be
seen,thoughit’shardtoobserveclearlyatadurationof60frames,soithelpstotemporarily
increase the frame count — say, to 300 — to make it much slower and more obvious during
testing:
PAL_fadeIn(0, 63, our_level_palette, 300, true);
For most screen transitions, a value between 20 and 30 frames tends to work better in prac-
tice, reserving much longer durations for deliberately dramatic effects, such as the gradual
appearance of an imposing enemy.
Although the fade itself works correctly, a brief flash of some graphic elements can still be
seen right at the start, before the fade becomes noticeable. The cause is the following: the
calltoPAL_fadeIn()happensasthelaststepbeforeloadingallthegraphicresources(tileset,
map, sprites), and memcpy() only moves the color data into RAM without touching the VDP’s
activepalette. Asaresult,whilethosegraphicresourcesareloading,theconsoleisstillusing
an SGDK default palette, and it’s precisely that default palette, briefly applied to the newly
loaded graphics, that shows up as an unwanted flash on screen before the fade begins.
The flash of the SGDK default palette, with colors clearly unrelated to the palette defined for
the level, briefly visible before the fade begins.
6. Removing the flash with PAL_setColors()
The solution is to explicitly set every color in the palette to black before loading any graphic
resources, so that even though the VDP uses its default palette during loading, that default
palette is already black and produces no visible flash. This is done with the PAL_setColors()
function, placed right before loading the tileset:
void PAL_setColors(u16 index, const u16 *pal, u16 count, TransferMethod tm);
PAL_setColors(0, palette_black, 64, DMA);
Thefirstparameter(index)isthecolorindextostartwritingat;sincethewholepaletteshould
be affected, 0 is used. The second parameter (pal) is the set of RGB intensities to apply; in-
steadofmanuallyspecifyingthevaluesforblack,SGDKalreadyprovidesapredefinedpalette
called palette_black, ready to use directly.
200

=== PAGE 207 ===
Figure 98: Flash of the SGDK default palette before the fade
The third parameter (count) behaves differently from how the first two parameters of
PAL_fadeIn()did: whereasPAL_fadeIn()tookastartingindexandaninclusiveendingindex,
in PAL_setColors() this parameter doesn’t represent an index at all, but a count of colors
to affect starting from the initial index. This is a difference in convention between the two
functions worth keeping in mind so as not to make a mistake by analogy: to cover all 64
colors of the palette (indices 0 through 63 inclusive), you don’t write 63, but 64, since you’re
counting 64 colors starting from index 0.
The fourth and final parameter (tm, transfer method) indicates the method used to transfer
to video memory; for this purpose, DMA is enough, with no need to dig into the available
alternatives yet (CPU, DMA_QUEUE, DMA_QUEUE_COPY).
With this change, the full sequence looks like this:
memcpy(&our_level_palette[0], background_image.palette->data, 64 * 2);
PAL_setColors(0, palette_black, 64, DMA);
VDP_loadTileSet(...);
// ... rest of graphic resource loading (map, sprites) ...
PAL_fadeIn(0, 63, our_level_palette, 60, true);
First the color data is copied into the our_level_palette array (no visible effect yet); then
every color of the active palette is set to black with PAL_setColors(); next the graphic re-
sources are loaded, which now produce no flash at all because the palette is already black;
and finally PAL_fadeIn() is applied to gradually bring in the real colors from that black.
Saving, building, and running the ROM again with this order produces a clean fade from
black, with no flash of graphic resources using the default palette.
Theorderoftheinstructionsisdecisive: ifPAL_setColors()isplacedafterloadingthegraphic
201

=== PAGE 208 ===
resources instead of before, the same default-palette flash observed originally reappears.
PAL_setColors() must always run before loading the graphic resources, never after.
7. The fifth parameter of PAL_fadeIn(): true versus false
Returning to the fifth parameter of PAL_fadeIn(), deferred from section 4: when it’s set to
true, the rest of the game’s processes (sprite updates, input handling, etc.) keep running
normally while the fade is in progress. When it’s changed to false, on the other hand, all
other game logic stays paused until the fade finishes completely.
PAL_fadeIn(0, 63, our_level_palette, 300, false);
Testing the ROM with this parameter set to false shows that, while the image fades in very
slowly from black, the sprites remain completely still: the main loop code responsible for
updating sprites and handling player input doesn’t run until the fade finishes.
Setting the parameter back to true, the sprites can move normally again while the fade’s
colors keep appearing gradually. In most cases true is the more suitable choice, reserving
false for specific scenarios where you deliberately want to fully pause the game’s logic for
thedurationofthetransition(forexample,anarrativetransitionscreenwherenointeraction
should be possible).
8. Partial fades: fading only part of the palette
The first two parameters of PAL_fadeIn() determine which range of color indices is affected
by the fade, and that range doesn’t have to cover the whole palette. If the range is set to
0 and 15, only the first 16 colors of the palette are faded (the ones that were PAL0, i.e., the
background), while the rest of the palette stays black:
PAL_fadeIn(0, 15, our_level_palette, 60, true);
With the range limited to 0-15, the background appears with its real colors while the fore-
ground and sprites remain black, as silhouettes.
Extending the range to 0 and 31 includes the first 32 colors of the palette — that is, both the
background and the foreground — while the player and enemy sprites (PAL2 and PAL3) still
remain black.
This is the foundation on which more elaborate staggered fade effects are built, where dif-
ferent parts of the scene appear at different moments instead of all at once. Achieving that
effect requires preparing additional arrays with different palettes and experimenting with
PAL_fadeIn() calls staggered over time (for example, triggering each call with a slight delay
relative to the previous one), though working out that example with full code is beyond the
scope of this chapter: the partial ranges 0-15 and 0-31 are already enough to demonstrate
the underlying principle.
Review exercises
1. Explain why copying an image’s color data into an array with memcpy() produces, by
itself, no visible change on screen.
2. Describe the five parameters of PAL_fadeIn() and the effect of each one, paying special
attention to the difference between the index range it takes and the color count taken
by PAL_setColors().
202

=== PAGE 209 ===
Figure 99: Fade restricted to the 0-15 range, only the background with real colors
3. Why is it necessary to call PAL_setColors() with the black palette before loading the
graphic resources, and what happens if that call is placed after loading instead?
4. Compare the behavior of the fifth parameter of PAL_fadeIn() when set to true versus
false, and give a scenario where false might be the more appropriate choice.
5. ExplainhowapartialrangeofindicesinPAL_fadeIn()(forexample,0-15or0-31)could
be used as a starting point for building a staggered fade effect with several parts of a
scene appearing at different moments.
203

=== PAGE 210 ===
Chapter 31 — D-Pad Controls
From sprites that are visible to sprites that move: position variables, a function of your own,
the if statement, and dynamic animation assignment based on player input
Part III left the graphical side of a playable character fully resolved: how to display it on
screen, how to animate it, and how to build its own animation sheet. What’s missing is the
piece that turns all of that into a game: letting the player control the character. This chapter
tackles that piece through the simplest possible example — the D-pad of a single joypad —
and along the way introduces two programming tools that will accompany the rest of this
manual: functions of your own and the if statement.
Thestartingpointisacharacteralreadyonscreen,standingstillatthecenter,playingafixed
animation. Everything that follows aims, first, to make that character move and, afterward,
to make that movement respond to what the player presses on the D-pad instead of being an
automatic motion.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it’s best to have covered:
• Chapter 21, “How to Display Sprites”: the Sprite* pointer, SPR_addSprite(),
SPR_setPosition(), and SPR_update(), which are reused directly here.
• Chapter 22, “Creating Sprites and Animation Sheets”: in particular, the idea that an
animationsheetisusuallydrawnfacingnaturallytowardoneside,andthattheopposite
side is handled with a horizontal flip instead of drawing a second sheet.
• Chapter 23, “Sprite Animation”: SPR_setAnim() and the practice of identifying each ani-
mation with a named constant (for example, via #define) instead of a bare number.
• Chapter 6, on data types: in particular, why it’s best to declare a screen coordinate as
s16 rather than int.
1. From fixed coordinates to position variables
Uptonow,asprite’spositionwaspassedtoSPR_addSprite()asapairofnumbershardcoded
into the code, for example 100 and 50. For the character to be able to move, those two
valuesneedtostopbeingconstantsandbecomevariablesthattheprogramcanmodifywhile
the game runs. The solution is to declare two variables, with names that make it clear they
representtheplayer’sposition—soasnottoconfusethem,forinstance,withanybackground-
scrollingvariablethatmightexistinthesameprogram—andusethemwhereverthereused
to be bare numbers:
s16 player_x = 100;
s16 player_y = 50;
204

=== PAGE 211 ===
Thetypechosenhereiss16,notint,deliberately: asexplainedinChapter6,SPR_setPosition()
expects precisely s16 coordinates (a signed 16-bit integer, from -32,768 to 32,767), which
is more than enough for any screen or map position of reasonable size. Declaring player_x
and player_y as int would also work — with values of at most a few hundred pixels there’s
no practical problem — but it’s less tidy: each int takes up twice the memory unnecessarily,
anditsvaluehastobeimplicitlyconvertedeverytimeit’spassedtoafunctionexpectings16.
Using s16 from the start avoids that conversion and is, moreover, the type that appears in
much of SGDK’s example code for this same purpose.
Compilingatthispointshouldn’tchangeanythingvisibleyet: thecharacterappearsinexactly
thesameplaceasbefore,becausethevariablesstartoutwiththesamevaluesasthenumbers
they replace. What changes is that these two variables can now be modified at any later
point in the program, and every time they change, the sprite engine needs to be told the
newpositionbycallingSPR_setPosition(player, player_x, player_y)—thesamefunction
already used in Chapter 21 — followed, as always, by SPR_update() so the change actually
reaches the screen.
As a first test, incrementing player_x at some point inside the main loop (while(1)) makes
the character move one pixel per frame to the right — that is, 60 pixels per second, given
thattheMegaDriveupdatesthescreenat60framespersecondinNTSCmode—completely
automatically, without the player intervening yet. That automatic result is only an intermedi-
atestep: theultimategoalisforthatincrementtodependonwhattheplayerpresses,rather
than happening unconditionally on every frame.
2. Isolating the code into a function of your own: han-
dle_input()
Beforegettingtothecontrolsthemselves,it’sworthtidyingupthecode. Everythingrelatedto
theplayer’spositionandmovementisgoingtogrowquiteabitoverthecourseofthischapter,
andleavingitlooseinsidethemainloop,alongsidetherestofthegame’sinitialization,quickly
makes the code hard to read. The usual solution — and the first time this manual builds a
functionofitsown,ratherthanusingonlyfunctionsalreadyprovidedbySGDK—istocreate
a function dedicated to handling player input:
static void handle_input()
{
}
Thesyntaxofafunctionhasthreerecognizableparts. Thetypebeforethename(voidinthis
case)indicateswhatthefunctionreturns: voidmeansitdoesn’treturnanyvalue,something
revisited in more detail later in this manual. The word static in front limits the function’s
visibility to this same file, a detail that also doesn’t need to be explored in depth yet. The
parenthesesafterthenamearewherethedatathefunctionneedstoreceivefromthecalling
code would go (SPR_setAnim(), for example, needs the sprite and the desired animation to
be indicated there), but handle_input() doesn’t need to receive any external data, so the
parentheses are left empty. Finally, the braces delimit the body: all the code the function
actually executes when it’s called.
With the function already created, the code that incremented player_x, incremented
player_y, and called SPR_setPosition() is cut from the main loop and pasted inside those
braces:
static void handle_input()
{
205

=== PAGE 212 ===
player_x += 1;
SPR_setPosition(player, player_x, player_y);
SPR_update();
}
Thelaststepistocallthefunctionfromthemainloop,simplywritinghandle_input();inthe
spot where the code used to be:
while (TRUE)
{
handle_input();
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
Whentheprogramreachesthatline,itjumpstothefunction’sdefinition,executeseverything
inside its braces, and then resumes right after the call. The visible result is identical to what
there was before moving the code: what changes is the organization, not the behavior. As
programsgrow,thispattern—pullingablockofcodeoutofthemainloopandencapsulating
it in a function with a name that describes what it does — will recur frequently throughout
the rest of this manual.
3. Order matters: declare before use
Beforemovingon,let’sseewhathappensiftheorderisreversed,becausetheresultingerror
showsclearlyhowtheCcompilerprocessesafile. If handle_input()iswrittenabovethedec-
laration of player_x and player_y, instead of below as in the previous example, compilation
fails with a message along the lines of player_x undeclared (first use in this function).
Unlikeother,moremodernlanguagesthatanalyzeanentirefilebeforerunninganything,the
C compiler used by SGDK processes the file from top to bottom, in a single pass. When it
reaches the line player_x += 1; inside handle_input(), if it hasn’t yet seen any declaration
of player_x further up in the file, it has no way of knowing that variable will exist a little
further down: it simply doesn’t recognize it, reports the error, and halts compilation right
there.
Thepracticalruleissimple,anditappliesgenerally,notjusttothisparticularcase:
any variable (or function) has to be declared earlier, further up in the file, than the
first place where it’s used.
Moving handle_input() back to its original position, after the declarations of player_x and
player_y, makes the error disappear.
4. Reading the D-pad: JOY_readJoypad() and the first if
With the code now tidied up, the next step is to replace the automatic increment of player_x
with a conditional increment: one that only happens if the player is pressing the D-pad to
the right. Reading the joypad’s state on a given frame is the job of a single SGDK func-
tion, JOY_readJoypad(), which needs to be told which joypad to read — JOY_1 for the first
controller, the only one used in this chapter — and which returns a value where each bit
indicates whether a button is pressed or not:
206

=== PAGE 213 ===
u16 value = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1);
Reacting to that value requires this manual’s first if statement. An if has two parts: a
condition in parentheses and a block of code in braces that executes only if that condition is
true — “if (this is true), then (do this).”
The condition for this first case combines the value read from the joypad with the BUT-
TON_RIGHT constant — provided by SGDK, one among several with analogous names for each
button, including the D-pad’s four directions — using the & operator (a single symbol, not
two). That operator compares the two values bit by bit, and the result is nonzero only when
thebitcorrespondingtotherightbuttonisactuallyactiveinthevalueread: inpractice,that
expression works as a question of “is the right button pressed right now?”.
static void handle_input()
{
u16 value = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1);
if (value & BUTTON_RIGHT)
{
player_x += 1;
}
SPR_setPosition(player, player_x, player_y);
SPR_update();
}
It’sworthpayingattentiontothefactthatthenamesoftheseconstantsarecase-sensitive,just
likeanyotheridentifierinC:writingthemdifferentlyfromhowSGDKdefinesthemproduces
a compilation error. With the condition complete, compiling and testing in the emulator con-
firmsthatthecharacternowmovestotherightonlywhiletheD-padisheldinthatdirection,
and stops as soon as it’s released.
AsalreadynotedinChapter4,differentemulatorscandifferinspecificcompatibility
details. Ifaninputexamplelikethisbehavesdifferentlybetweentwoemulators,it’s
best to first rule out your own code by testing it in more than one emulator before
assuming the problem lies in the program.
5. The four directions and efficiency with else if
Repeating the same recipe — an if, a BUTTON_* constant, an increment or decrement of
player_x or player_y — for all four D-pad directions would already be enough for complete
movement in all four directions, including diagonals, if each direction is written as an inde-
pendent if. However, there’s a simple, zero-cost optimization available here: the physical
D-pad makes it impossible to press right and left at the same time (they’re the same axis, in
opposite directions), and the same goes for up and down. That physical impossibility can be
exploited by replacing the second if of each pair with an else if: if it’s already been con-
firmedthattherightbuttonispressed,there’snoneedtoevenevaluatetheconditionforthe
left button, because both can’t be true at once.
if (value & BUTTON_RIGHT)
{
player_x += 1;
}
else if (value & BUTTON_LEFT)
207

=== PAGE 214 ===
{
player_x -= 1;
}
if (value & BUTTON_UP)
{
player_y -= 1;
}
else if (value & BUTTON_DOWN)
{
player_y += 1;
}
The detail that needs care is that these two optimizations must remain in separate pairs —
one for the horizontal axis, another for the vertical one — and not have all four directions
chained into a single continuous if / else if / else if / else if sequence. That distinction
isn’tcosmetic: ifthefourdirectionsendupchainedasasinglesequence,theresultwouldno
longer support diagonal movement, because once the condition for the right button (or left)
turns out true, the rest of the chain — including the up and down conditions — is skipped
entirely, even if the player is also pressing a vertical direction. This is the code that should
not be written:
/* Incorrect version: breaks diagonal movement */
if (value & BUTTON_RIGHT)
{
player_x += 1;
}
else if (value & BUTTON_LEFT)
{
player_x -= 1;
}
else if (value & BUTTON_UP)
{
player_y -= 1;
}
else if (value & BUTTON_DOWN)
{
player_y += 1;
}
Thedifferencebetweenthetwoversionsissubtletoreadbutveryvisiblewhenplaying: with
twoindependentpairs, pressingrightandupsimultaneouslymovesthecharacterdiagonally
withoutissue,becauseeachaxisisevaluatedinitsownif,independentoftheother. Withthe
singlechain,pressingupwhilerightisalreadybeingpressedhasnoeffectatall,becausethe
programnevergetstoevaluatethatcondition. It’sworthtryingbothversionsintheemulator:
it’s an easy mistake to make without realizing why the outcome changes.
6. Animations that respond to movement
Thecharacteralreadymovesinallfourdirections,butitstillshowsthesamefixedanimation
thewholetime,theoneitstartedthechapterwith. Thenextstepisfortheanimationplayedto
alsodependonwhethertheplayerismovingornot,reusingtheanimationconstantsdefined
inChapter23(ANIM_STILL,ANIM_IDLE,ANIM_WALK,ANIM_UPPER,orwhateverequivalentnames
208

=== PAGE 215 ===
were chosen for the sprite sheet in use).
Withthatsetofconstantsalreadyavailable,eachofthefourif/else ifblocksfromthepre-
vioussectioncaninclude,inadditiontothecoordinatechange,acalltoSPR_setAnim(player,
ANIM_WALK): while the player presses any direction, the character walks. What’s still missing
is the opposite case — which animation to show when no direction is being pressed — which
requires a new condition: that none of the four directions is active at the same time. That’s
written by negating each individual condition with the ! (“not”) operator and combining the
four negations with the && operator (two & symbols, unlike the single & used to read an indi-
vidual button):
static void handle_input()
{
u16 value = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1);
if (value & BUTTON_RIGHT)
{
player_x += 1;
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_WALK);
}
else if (value & BUTTON_LEFT)
{
player_x -= 1;
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_WALK);
}
if (value & BUTTON_UP)
{
player_y -= 1;
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_WALK);
}
else if (value & BUTTON_DOWN)
{
player_y += 1;
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_WALK);
}
if (!(value & BUTTON_RIGHT) && !(value & BUTTON_LEFT) &&
!(value & BUTTON_UP) && !(value & BUTTON_DOWN))
{
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_IDLE);
}
SPR_setPosition(player, player_x, player_y);
SPR_update();
}
Usingtwodifferentsymbolsforoperationsthatlooksimilaratfirstglance—&toaskwhether
aspecificbitofavalueisactive,&&tocombineseveraltrue-or-falseconditionswitheachother
— isn’t an arbitrary style choice: they’re two distinct operators in C, with distinct meanings,
and although in some cases using one instead of the other compiles just fine, the result isn’t
thesame. It’sbesttotreatthemasseparatetools—thefirstforinspectingabit-valuelikethe
one returned by JOY_readJoypad(), the second for combining boolean conditions like those
in an if — rather than swapping them freely.
209

=== PAGE 216 ===
The result combines both behaviors: the character walks while any direction is pressed and
returns to idle as soon as all of them are released. This same scheme — a walking animation
sharedbyallfourdirectionsandanidleonewhenthere’snoinput—iscommoneveningames
whereupanddowndon’thaveadedicatedwalkinganimationdistinctfromthesidewaysone;
each project can decide that detail on its own.
7. Orienting the sprite: SPR_setHFlip() and the “moon-
walk” problem
Onelastvisualdetailremains. AsexplainedinChapter22,it’scommonforananimationsheet
to be drawn facing naturally toward just one side; to show the character facing the opposite
direction, a horizontal flip is used, either fixed when the sprite is loaded — via TILE_ATTR(),
seeninChapter21—or,asisneededhere,changeddynamicallywhilethegameruns. SGDK
provides SPR_setHFlip() for this, which takes the sprite to modify and a boolean value indi-
cating whether it should be flipped or not:
SPR_setHFlip(player, FALSE);
Addingthatlineinsidetheleftward-movementblock,thecharacterisshowninitsnaturalori-
entation when moving to that side. But moving to the right — which, before this change, dis-
playedcorrectlybecausethespritewasoriginallyloadedwiththeflipenabledinTILE_ATTR()
—now keepstheflipappliedfromthelasttime, evenaftermovingrightagain: thecharacter
walks facing away from its own direction of travel, an effect informally known as “moonwalk-
ing.” Thecauseissimplythatthere’sstillnoinstructiontellingthespritetostopbeingflipped
when moving right. The solution is to add the equivalent call, with the opposite value, in the
right-button block:
if (value & BUTTON_RIGHT)
{
player_x += 1;
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_WALK);
SPR_setHFlip(player, TRUE);
}
else if (value & BUTTON_LEFT)
{
player_x -= 1;
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_WALK);
SPR_setHFlip(player, FALSE);
}
With both calls in place, TRUE when moving right and FALSE when moving left, the character
stays correctly oriented no matter which direction it moves in.
Everything covered so far addresses input by polling: JOY_readJoypad() is queried once per
frame,insidethemainloop,andthecodereactstowhateveritfindsatthatinstant. SGDKalso
offers an event-based mechanism, JOY_setEventHandler(), which allows reacting to joypad
statechangeswithouthavingtopollitframebyframe;it’savalidalternativeforcertaincases,
though the direct polling used in this chapter is sufficient and is the simplest starting point
for understanding how player input relates to the game’s state.
210

=== PAGE 217 ===
Review exercises
1. Explain, in your own words, why declaring a function before the variables it uses pro-
duces a compilation error in C, and what general rule should be followed to avoid it.
2. What’s the difference between the & operator used in (value & BUTTON_RIGHT) and the
&& operator used in the idle-state condition? Why can’t they be used interchangeably?
3. Ateammatewritesthecontrollogicforthefourdirectionsasasingleif/else if/else
if / else if chain, instead of two independent pairs. What concrete symptom will they
notice while playing, and why does it happen?
4. ExplainwhythecharacterinthischapterneedsacalltoSPR_setHFlip()intherightward-
movementblockinadditiontotheonealreadyintheleftward-movementblock,andwhat
would happen if one of the two were omitted.
5. Describehowyouwouldextendthischapter’scodesothatthecharacter,insteadofonly
walking or standing still, could also run while holding down an additional button. What
new variable or condition would need to be added?
211

=== PAGE 218 ===
Chapter 32 — Button Controls
and Event-Based Reading
Chapter 31 solved character movement through continuous polling: on every frame, han-
dle_input() asks JOY_readJoypad() alloveragainwhat’sbeingpressedatthatinstant. That
approach works well for the D-pad, but it isn’t the only way SGDK offers to handle player
input, and in fact it isn’t the best fit for everything. This chapter introduces the second ap-
proach: an event-based mechanism, where the code doesn’t actively ask on every frame, but
instead SGDK automatically notifies it whenever something changed on the joypad.
The title speaks of “button controls” following the more common convention, but it’s worth
clarifying from the start that the real distinction isn’t D-pad versus buttons, but continuous
versus one-shot: in a menu navigated with the D-pad, the event mechanism is the right fit,
andinanattackthat’shelddown,continuouspollingistherightfit,eventhoughinbothcases
the physical control is the same kind of button. The second half of the chapter picks up this
distinctionwithaconcreteexample: anattackanimationthatneedstoplayoutinfullevenif
the player releases the button before it finishes, which requires introducing a timer.
Prerequisites
• Having completed Chapter 31 (“D-pad Controls”): the handle_input() function,
JOY_readJoypad(), the BUTTON_* constants, the & operator for reading a single bit, and
the use of if / else if / && / ! already explained there won’t be repeated in detail here.
• Having completed Chapter 6 (“C Applied to Retro Development: Data Types, Limited
Memory, and Pointers”): the u8, u16, and s16 types, and the criterion of choosing the
smallest type that fits the expected range of values, are revisited in this chapter for the
attack timer variables.
• Ideally,havingcompletedChapter23(“SpriteAnimation”): thetimingfieldofananima-
tion in resources.res is measured in sixtieths of a second per frame, a unit this chapter
uses again to calculate how long an attack animation should last.
1. Two ways of reacting to player input
Before writing code, it’s worth looking at how controls behave in existing games, because
thedifferenceiseasiertonoticebyplayingthanbyreading. Inatypicalplatformeroraction
game, moving with the D-pad is a continuous process: while the player holds the right side
down, the character keeps moving right, frame after frame, without needing to release and
press again. Attacking or jumping, on the other hand, is usually a one-shot event: pressing
thebuttononcetriggerstheactionexactlyonce,andeveniftheplayerkeepsthebuttonheld
down, the action doesn’t repeat until it’s released and pressed again.
212

=== PAGE 219 ===
Figure 100: Comparison between continuous movement and a one-shot attack
Holdingdowntheattackbuttondoesn’tproducerepeatedhits: youhavetoreleaseandpress
again for each one, unlike the continuous movement of the D-pad.
There are, however, situations where the D-pad, normally associated with continuous move-
ment,alsobenefitsfromone-shotbehavior. Theclearestexampleisoptionsmenus: ifmoving
the cursor between “1 Player,” “2 Players,” “Options,” and “Battle” responded to the D-pad
thesamecontinuouswaycharactermovementdoes,updatingtheselectiononeachofthe60
frames per second while the button stays pressed, it would be practically impossible to stop
on the desired option without overshooting it by several positions.
In an options menu, each D-pad press moves the cursor exactly one position, no matter how
long the button is held down.
In short, the choice between continuous polling and a one-shot event doesn’t depend on
whetherit’stheD-padorabutton, butonwhatkindofresponsethatparticularactionneeds.
Asageneralruleandastartingpoint—notasanabsolutelaw—charactermovementusually
belongsinthecontinuouspollingfunction(handle_input(),alreadybuiltinChapter31),and
single-shot actions belong in the event mechanism this chapter introduces. But, as we’ll see
further on, there are legitimate exceptions in both directions.
2. The event mechanism: JOY_setEventHandler() and a func-
tion with a fixed signature
SGDKoffersasecondwaytoreadthejoypad, differentfromcalling JOY_readJoypad() inside
themainloop: registeringyourownfunctionthatSGDKwillcallautomaticallyeverytimethe
state of some joypad changes. That function has to have an exact signature, predefined by
SGDK through the JoyEventCallback type:
213

=== PAGE 220 ===
Figure 101: Options menu navigated with one-shot D-pad control
typedef void JoyEventCallback(u16 joy, u16 changed, u16 state);
Its three parameters indicate, in order, which joypad changed (joy), which buttons changed
state since the last reading (changed), and what the full current state is (state). Unlike han-
dle_input(), written with total freedom of name, parameters, and how it’s called, this func-
tion has to respect that exact three-parameter u16 signature so SGDK can invoke it correctly.
The function’s name is indeed free — in this manual it’s called joyEvent, but you can choose
any other name — as long as the order and type of the parameters are preserved.
Insideit,changedindicates,bitbybit,whichbuttonschangedstatesincethelastreading,and
stateindicates, alsobitbybit, whichonesarepressedrightnow. Combiningbothwiththe&
operator— forexample, changed & state & BUTTON_RIGHT —is equivalentto asking“did the
right button change state, and is that new state pressed?”, which is exactly the definition of
“the right button was just pressed”: if the button was already pressed on the previous frame,
changed would be zero for that bit and the whole expression would come out to zero, even
though state still marks the button as pressed.
It’s worth pausing on this expression for a moment, because there’s an alterna-
tive form, documented in the official SGDK wiki, that separates the two operators:
(changed & BUTTON_X) && (state & BUTTON_X). For a single button, both forms
are mathematically equivalent. Since BUTTON_X has a single bit set to 1, the result
of changed & state & BUTTON_X is nonzero exactly when that bit is set to 1 in
both changed and state; and that’s precisely the same thing evaluated separately
bychanged & BUTTON_X(nonzeroifthebitchanged)andstate & BUTTON_X(nonzero
if the bit is pressed), combined with &&. This equivalence holds only for testing a
single button at a time: it can’t simply be generalized to a mask that combines
several different buttons with | (for example, BUTTON_A | BUTTON_B). In that case,
changed & state & mask requires that there be a bit within the mask that’s set si-
multaneously in changed and in state, while (changed & mask) && (state & mask)
214

=== PAGE 221 ===
issatisfiedifsomebitofthemaskchangedandsomebitofthemask(notnecessar-
ily the same one) is pressed — two different conditions that can produce different
results. For a single button this distinction disappears, but it’s worth keeping in
mind before copying the pattern into a condition with multiple buttons.
The other point where this function departs from what’s been seen so far is how it gets trig-
gered. Thecustomfunctionsbuiltsofar,likehandle_input(), needanexplicitcallinsidethe
mainlooptorunoneveryframe. Thisfunction,bycontrast,isnevercalleddirectlyanywhere:
it’s registered once, in main(), with JOY_setEventHandler():
void JOY_setEventHandler(JoyEventCallback *CB);
passingitthefunction’sname(withoutparentheses,sincehereitisn’tbeingcalledbutrather
pointed out to SGDK):
JOY_setEventHandler(joyEvent);
From that registration onward, SGDK takes care of invoking joyEvent() automatically every
time it detects a change on the joypad, without the main loop having to actively ask about it.
TocheckthedifferenceinbehavioragainstChapter31,youcanduplicatethesamemovement
codefromhandle_input()insidejoyEvent()—replacingonlyvalue & BUTTON_*withchanged
& state & BUTTON_* — and test it in the emulator. The result confirms the idea from the
previoussection: pressingandholdingadirectionmovesthecharacterexactlyonce,andyou
have to release and press again to move it further — precisely the one-shot behavior that
doesn’t work for smooth character movement, but does work for a menu.
The BUTTON_A, BUTTON_B, and BUTTON_C constants, just like BUTTON_RIGHT and the rest of the
direction constants already used in Chapter 31, remain unchanged in SGDK 2.11.
3. Commenting out code versus deleting it
A habit worth adopting early, and one that becomes especially relevant when switching back
and forth between testing movement in joyEvent() and returning it to handle_input(), is
tellingapartwhencommentingoutcodewith//makessenseandwhenitdoesn’t. Comment-
ing out code makes sense when there’s a real intention to bring it back later — for example,
to compare two alternative behaviors while deciding which one to use — but any line that’s
known to be useless going forward should simply be deleted rather than left commented out.
Commented-out code that piles up without a clear purpose is, over time, a source of bugs:
it becomes hard to tell at a glance which commented block is intentional and which is just
something that was never cleaned up, and a stray line that gets accidentally uncommented
along with the rest of a block can introduce unwanted behavior, such as a position variable
that keeps incrementing with no condition attached, hard to trace if the file has too many
commented-out fragments scattered without any criteria.
4. A first attempt at an attack, and why it falls short
With the event mechanism already tested, the rest of the chapter focuses on a more realistic
example: an attack animation triggered with the B button, using the character’s animation
sheetalreadyseeninpreviouschapters. Theleastelaboratereactionwouldbetoadd,directly
inside handle_input(), one more condition for the B button alongside the ones that already
exist for the four directions:
if (value & BUTTON_B) SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_UPPER);
215

=== PAGE 222 ===
Theproblemwiththisapproachshowsupimmediatelywhentestingit: sincehandle_input()
re-evaluatesthisconditiononeveryoneofthe60framespersecondforaslongascontinuous
polling runs, holding down the B button plays the attack animation uninterrupted, instead of
a single hit. This is exactly the continuous behavior section 1 identified as unsuitable for an
attack action: the player would expect to press the button once, see the full hit play out, and
only then be able to attack again.
Simply pulling this code out of handle_input() and putting it into joyEvent(), using changed
& state instead of continuous polling, fixes the repetition problem but introduces a new one:
theeventonlytriggersSPR_setAnim()duringthesingleframeinwhichthechangeisdetected,
so the full animation never gets to play — you barely see one loose frame of the hit before
theidlecode(stillpollingcontinuouslyinhandle_input())interruptsitandinstantlysnapsit
back to the idle or walking animation.
What’s missing, then, isn’t simply choosing one of the two mechanisms, but combining them:
use the event to trigger the attack exactly once, and some sort of elapsed-time count to keep
thatanimationonscreenforaslongasitlasts,and,inthemeantime,tokeeptheD-padfrom
interrupting the attack or being interrupted by it.
5. A timer to sustain the animation: attack_timer and at-
tack_duration
The solution consists of adding two new variables, declared alongside the rest of the pro-
gram’s global variables: attack_timer, which starts at zero and keeps count of how many
frames the current attack animation has been running, and attack_duration, a constant in-
dicating how many frames that animation should last before returning to idle. Since both
quantities are always non-negative and small in range — there’s no need to represent large
or negative numbers — it makes sense to declare them as u16 rather than int, following the
same criterion from Chapter 6 about choosing the type best suited to the expected range of
values(it’salsothesametypealreadyusedbychangedandstateinthejoyEvent()signature):
u16 attack_timer = 0;
u16 attack_duration; // computed further below
The value of attack_duration isn’t picked by eye: it’s computed from the same data already
used in Chapter 23 to define an animation’s speed in resources.res. If the attack animation
has, say, seven frames, and each frame is configured to last eight sixtieths of a second (the
sametimingfieldoftheSPRITEresourceexplainedinthatchapter),thetotalduration,inthat
same unit of sixtieths of a second, is the product of both numbers:
#define ATTACK_DURATION (7 * 8) // 7 frames x 8 sixtieths of a second = 56
This calculation is exactly reproducible for any other animation: it’s enough to multiply the
number of frames by the configured duration of each frame in resources.res, as long as —
as is usually the case — all the frames of that animation share the same duration.
6. Starting the attack and suspending the D-pad while it
lasts
With both variables already declared, the code inside joyEvent() that triggers the attack
looks like this:
216

=== PAGE 223 ===
void joyEvent(u16 joy, u16 changed, u16 state)
{
if ((changed & state & BUTTON_B) && attack_timer == 0)
{
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_UPPER);
attack_timer += 1;
}
}
Besides changing the animation, the condition increments attack_timer by one as soon as
theBbuttonpressisdetected,andrequiresattack_timertobezerobeforestarting: without
thislastaddition,holdingBdowncouldrestarttheattackanimationoneveryframeinwhich
SGDK detected the button as just pressed. In practice this would no longer happen anyway,
because, as we’ll see next, handle_input() stays suspended during the attack; even so, it’s a
cheap check in terms of CPU that avoids restarting the count unnecessarily.
The other change is in the main loop: the call to handle_input(), which in Chapter 31 was
made unconditionally, is now guarded:
if (attack_timer == 0) handle_input();
Since this condition has just one line of code to run if it’s true, there’s no need to wrap it
in braces — both forms are equivalent in C, and using the brace-less version for a single
statement is simply a matter of style, though it’s worth going back to braces as soon as the
blockgrowspastoneline,toavoidmistakeswhenaddingcodelaterwithoutnoticingitended
up outside the if. As long as attack_timer is zero, handle_input() runs as usual and the D-
pad works just like in Chapter 31; as soon as the player presses B, attack_timer stops being
zero and handle_input() simply stops being called, which freezes the character’s movement
during the attack, exactly as intended.
There’s a syntax detail here that’s a classic source of bugs in C: the condition attack_timer
== 0 uses two equal signs, because it’s a logical comparison (“is it equal to zero?”), while
assigningavaluetoavariable—asinattack_timer = 0,whichappearsfurtherdown—uses
asingleequalsign. Confusingthetwooperatorsisaneasymistaketomake,onethecompiler
doesn’talwayscatch,sinceattack_timer = 0insideanifconditionisalsoavalidexpression
in C (it assigns zero and then evaluates that zero as false), only with a completely different
effect than intended.
7. Keeping the count going while the attack plays out
Incrementing attack_timer just once, when B is pressed, isn’t enough: it needs to keep
adding one for every frame that passes while the attack is in progress, so that it eventu-
ally reaches attack_duration and the D-pad is freed again. That continuous increment can’t
liveinjoyEvent(), whichonlyrunsattheone-offinstantthebutton’sstatechanges; ithasto
run frame by frame, like the rest of the main loop. The solution is to add, alongside the if
(attack_timer == 0) handle_input(); already written, an else if condition covering the
rest of the frames while the attack is underway:
if (attack_timer == 0)
handle_input();
else if (attack_timer > 0 && attack_timer < attack_duration)
attack_timer += 1;
This condition introduces two comparison operators — greater than (>) and less than (<) —
217

=== PAGE 224 ===
that haven’t appeared in this manual until now, though their meaning is the same as in ordi-
nary arithmetic. The full condition, attack_timer > 0 && attack_timer < attack_duration,
reads as “while the attack has already started but hasn’t finished yet,” and when it holds, it
simply adds one more to the counter, frame after frame.
Before tackling the missing step, it’s worth verifying that the attack_duration calculation
actually matters: deliberately changing it to a value that’s too high — 60 instead of 56, say,
for the example of seven frames at eight sixtieths of a second each — causes the animation
to complete its run and start over from the first frame before the counter gets around to
releasing the D-pad, producing a small, visible repeat of the hit.
Figure 102: A miscalculated attack_duration produces a repeat of the hit
With attack_duration set to 60 instead of 56, the seven-frame animation has already finished
its run but the timer still hasn’t released the D-pad, so the hit repeats from the start before
the character can move again.
8. Closing the loop: resetting the timer, and simplifying
with else
One step is still missing: at some point, attack_timer has to go back to zero so the cycle can
repeat. Without that last step, once the count up to attack_duration finishes, the counter
wouldsimplystopincrementing(becauseneitherofthetwoconditionsalreadywrittenwould
still be true), but it would never go back to zero, leaving the D-pad frozen forever.
The missing step is adding a third condition that detects when attack_timer has reached
exactly attack_duration, and in that case resets it to zero, freeing the D-pad again. That
conditioncouldbewrittenexplicitly,comparingattack_timer == attack_duration,butsince
it’sexactlytheoneandonlycasenotalreadycoveredbythetwopreviousconditions(neither
zero, nor a value between zero and attack_duration), a plain else, with no condition of its
own, is enough to catch everything left over:
218

=== PAGE 225 ===
if (attack_timer == 0)
handle_input();
else if (attack_timer > 0 && attack_timer < attack_duration)
attack_timer += 1;
else
attack_timer = 0;
This kind of simplification is convenient, but it demands close attention: an else with no
conditionrunsitscodeeverytimenoneofthepreviousbranchesheld,soyouhavetobesure
that “everything else” matches exactly the case you want to cover, and not some unforeseen
one. Inthisparticularcase,withonlythreepossiblestatesforattack_timer(zero,inprogress,
orfinished),thesimplificationissafeandsavesanexplicitcomparison,butitisn’tatechnique
to apply without thinking in more complex chains of conditions.
With the logic now complete and tested, one last purely organizational adjustment is worth
making, in the same spirit that already motivated creating handle_input() in Chapter 31:
rather than leaving these three loose lines inside the main loop, wrap them in their own
function and call it from there, so the main loop stays readable at a glance:
void attack_function(void)
{
if (attack_timer == 0)
handle_input();
else if (attack_timer > 0 && attack_timer < attack_duration)
attack_timer += 1;
else
attack_timer = 0;
}
And in main():
JOY_setEventHandler(joyEvent);
while (TRUE)
{
attack_function();
SPR_update();
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
There’soneremainingdifferenceworthhighlightingbetweenthetwocustomfunctionscoex-
isting in this program: handle_input() and attack_function() are ordinary functions, need-
inganexplicitcallinsidewhile (TRUE)toruneveryframe,whilejoyEvent()istheexception,
registered once with JOY_setEventHandler() and never called directly from your own code.
With this reorganization, the result behaves exactly the same as before — the D-pad moves
the character normally, the B button triggers a single hit that plays all the way through, and
only then does the D-pad respond again — but with a considerably tidier main loop.
9. So, handle_input() or joyEvent()?
With the full example already built, it’s worth revisiting the question from section 1 with
moretogoon. Thegeneralrule—continuousmovementinhandle_input(),one-shotactions
in joyEvent() — remains a good starting point, but this very chapter showed two concrete
exceptions worth keeping in mind when designing the controls of your own game. On one
219

=== PAGE 226 ===
hand, an options menu navigated with the D-pad is one of the few common situations where
it makes sense to move the direction code into joyEvent(), precisely because that’s where a
one-shot movement is wanted, one per press, rather than continuous. On the other hand, an
actionthatneedstomeasurehowlongabuttonishelddown(achargedattack, forexample)
has to rely on continuous polling inside handle_input() (or an equivalent function), since
joyEvent() only reports the instant something changes, not how long a state is held.
The choice, then, isn’t a mechanical rule but a design decision that depends on what each
particularactionneeds: iftheplayerexpectsholdingthebuttondowntoproduceacontinuous
effect, use polling; if they expect each press to count as an isolated event, use the event
mechanism. This chapter’s attack example, with its timer, also shows that both mechanisms
can be combined within a single action when needed: an event to trigger something once,
and continuous polling to sustain it over time.
Review exercises
1. Explaininyourownwordsthedifferencebetweenthechangedparameterandthestate
parameterofaneventfunctionlikejoyEvent(),andwhybothneedtobecombined(with
&) to detect the instant a button is pressed, rather than using just one of the two.
2. Why is an options menu navigated with the D-pad usually implemented with the event
mechanism (joyEvent()) rather than the continuous polling (handle_input()) used to
move the character?
3. A teammate writes if (value & BUTTON_B) SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_UPPER); inside
handle_input() to program an attack. When testing it, holding down the B button pro-
duces a continuous, unbroken attack instead of a single hit. Explain why this happens
and what’s missing to achieve the intended behavior.
4. A jump animation has 5 frames, each configured with a duration of 10 sixtieths of a sec-
ond in resources.res. Calculate what a constant equivalent to attack_duration should
be worth for that animation.
5. Show, with a concrete example (values for changed, state, and a mask combining two
different buttons, for example BUTTON_A | BUTTON_B), a case where changed & state &
mask and (changed & mask) && (state & mask) produce different results, and explain
why the equivalence between the two forms only holds for a single button.
220

=== PAGE 227 ===
Chapter 33 — 2-Player Mode
Doubling the sprite, the joypad, and the attack timer without doubling the bugs
Thischapterdoesn’tintroduceanynewSGDKfunctions: ittakeseverythingbuiltintheprevi-
oustwochapters—handle_input()fortheD-padandjoyEvent()/attack_function()forthe
timedattack—andextendsitfromoneplayertotwo, withAxelandSonicsharingthescreen
andeachrespondingtotheirownjoypad. Thetechnicalresultismodest: duplicatevariables,
duplicate blocks of code. But doing it properly exposes several practical problems that don’t
show up with a single player: how to copy code without making mistakes when renaming
variables, why two different sprite sheets don’t necessarily share the same row layout, and a
logic bug that ends up moving both characters at twice the expected speed.
Extendingasingle-playersystemtoseveralplayersisalmostneverassimpleas“justaddmore
code”: itoftenforcesyoutorevisitcodethatalreadyworked,becauseassumptionsthatwere
valid with one player —such as a given function being called exactly once per frame— stop
holding as soon as more than one character shares the same logic.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, you should already have in place:
• D-pad controls (chap. 31): handle_input(), JOY_readJoypad(), and the if / else if
structure for the four directions.
• Buttoncontrols(chap.32): joyEvent(),JOY_setEventHandler(),andtheattack_timer/
attack_duration / attack_function() mechanism for sustaining an attack animation.
• The fact that the Mega Drive has four hardware palettes, PAL0 through PAL3 (chap. 2),
and that each sprite is assigned one of them when it’s loaded.
This last point is not a minor detail for this chapter: as we’ll see shortly, a second playable
character uses up the last available palette.
1. A second sprite: Sonic on palette PAL3
The first step is a resource one: add Sonic’s sprite sheet to the project with a SPRITE line
in resources.res, the same way it was done for Axel back in the sprite creation chapter,
specifyingname,file,framesize,compression,andplaybackspeed. Withtheresourcealready
compiled,youneedtodeclareasecondspritepointeranditsownpositionvariables,alongside
the ones that already existed for Axel:
Sprite* player2;
s16 player2_x = 300;
s16 player2_y = 150;
221

=== PAGE 228 ===
LoadingthespriterepeatsexactlythesamestepsalreadyseenforAxel,withSPR_addSprite()
this time pointing to Sonic’s resource and to palette PAL3 instead of PAL2:
player2 = SPR_addSprite(&sonic_sprite, player2_x, player2_y,
TILE_ATTR(PAL3, FALSE, FALSE, TRUE));
This palette choice isn’t arbitrary, nor is there any room to pick something else: the Mega
Drivehasexactlyfourhardwarepalettes(PAL0throughPAL3),andinthisprogramallfourare
already in use: one for the background and one for each playable character. With Axel using
PAL2, PAL3 is the only palette left free for Sonic. This means that, as the example currently
stands, there’s no room to add a third sprite with its own palette without reusing one of the
fouralreadyassigned: anadditionalenemyoritemwouldhavetoshareapalettewithoneof
the existing elements, or give up part of its color range.
Compilingatthispoint—withSonicalreadyonscreenbutstillwithoutanycontrolsattached—
reveals a visual detail that at first glance looks like a bug: even though player_x, player_y,
player2_x,andplayer2_yhaveexactlythesamenumericvalues,AxelandSonicdon’tappear
at the same height on screen.
Figure 103: Axel and Sonic with the same position coordinates
Axel and Sonic share the same numeric position values, but appear at different heights on
screen.
Theexplanationisthesameideaalreadycoveredwhendisplayingsprites: thepositionpassed
toSPR_addSprite()isthetop-leftcorneroftheentireanimationframe,notofthefiguredrawn
inside that frame. Since Axel’s sheet has a larger frame size than Sonic’s sheet —each sheet
was created separately, with its own canvas— the same pair of numeric coordinates ends up
placingthetop-leftcornerofframesofdifferentsizes,andthefiguredrawninsideeachframe
appears at a slightly different apparent position.
222

=== PAGE 229 ===
2. Avoiding manual copying: a throwaway file and find-
and-replace
The next step —duplicating all the code in handle_input() and joyEvent() so that an equiv-
alent version exists for player2— could be done by copying the player block and manually
changing every instance of value, player, player_x, and player_y to its player2 equivalent.
Withjustafewlinesthisistediousbutmanageable;inalargerprogramitwouldbeslowand
error-prone, because it’s easy to forget to rename some stray instance. The cleaner alterna-
tive is to take advantage of find-and-replace, but applied carefully.
Thefirstprecautionisnottoapplyitdirectlyonmain.c: sincethesearchscansthewholefile,
replacingplayerwithplayer2wouldalsoaffectanyoccurrenceofplayerthatalreadybelongs
toplayer1’scode,breakingit. Thepracticalsolutionistocreateanew,throwawayfileinside
the project’s src folder —one that isn’t included anywhere in the program or compiled—,
pasteacopyof player1’scodeblockintoit,andmakethereplacementsonlyonthatisolated
copy.
Thesecondprecautionhastodowithtwosearchoptionsthatareworthenablingdeliberately.
With neither enabled, searching for the word value, for example, finds any occurrence of
those characters, even as part of a longer word. Enabling case sensitivity makes the search
distinguishvaluefromVALUE;enablingwhole-wordmatchingmakessearchingforplayerskip
matches inside player_x or player_y, finding only the standalone word player.
Thatdistinctionmattersbecause,inthisparticularcase,it’sfinetoreplaceeveryoccurrence
of valuewithvalue2withnospecialrestriction,butwhenreplacingplayerwithplayer2you
need to enable whole-word matching. Without it, player_x would end up indirectly turned
into player2_x, and then, on a later replacement pass over player_x, the result would come
out duplicated or inconsistent. Before hitting “replace all,” it’s worth checking how many
matches the search tool reports: if the number doesn’t match what you expected, that’s a
sign the search is finding something other than what you meant to replace. Once the copy
hasbeenfullyrenamed,thefinalstepistopasteitbackintomain.c,belowtheoriginalplayer1
code, and discard the temporary file.
This same problem —manually duplicating a set of variables for every new game
element— shows up much more noticeably once a game needs not two but several
charactersorenemiesonscreenatonce. Laterinthismanual,whenagame’senti-
tiesareorganizedusingstructs(chap.53),thissameneedtogeneralizearepeated
pattern comes back, but with a tool designed specifically for that purpose.
3. The second joypad in handle_input(), and a mismatched
mirror
With the block already duplicated and renamed, the first real change inside handle_input()
is reading a second joypad in addition to the first, leaving a comment to visually mark where
each player’s code begins:
void handle_input() {
u16 value = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1);
u16 value2 = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_2);
// PLAYER1
if (value & BUTTON_RIGHT) {
player_x += 1;
SPR_setHFlip(player, FALSE);
223

=== PAGE 230 ===
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_WALK);
} else if (value & BUTTON_LEFT) {
player_x -= 1;
SPR_setHFlip(player, TRUE);
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_WALK);
}
// ... rest of player1's directions ...
// PLAYER2
if (value2 & BUTTON_RIGHT) {
player2_x += 1;
SPR_setHFlip(player2, TRUE);
SPR_setAnim(player2, ANIM_WALK);
} else if (value2 & BUTTON_LEFT) {
player2_x -= 1;
SPR_setHFlip(player2, FALSE);
SPR_setAnim(player2, ANIM_WALK);
}
// ... rest of player2's directions ...
SPR_setPosition(player, player_x, player_y);
SPR_setPosition(player2, player2_x, player2_y);
}
Thisseparationwithcomments(// PLAYER1,// PLAYER2)isasimplebutusefulconventionas
a single function grows to handle more than one character.
Testingthis, both characters already movein all four directions with their respective D-pads,
butavisualproblemshowsupwithSonic: whenmovingleftorright,heappearstobewalking
backwards relative to his actual direction of movement.
Sonic walks to the left, but the sprite ends up facing the opposite of his actual direction of
movement.
This isn’t a logic error but, once again, a difference between the two sprite sheets: Axel’s
sheet was drawn facing left by default (as already seen in the D-pad controls chapter), while
the Sonic sheet used here was drawn facing right by default. Since the SPR_setHFlip() code
copied for player2 assumes the same default orientation as Axel, it ends up mirroring Sonic
exactly backwards from what’s needed. The fix —already applied in the block above— is to
swaptheTRUEandFALSEvaluesinthetwoSPR_setHFlip()callsintheplayer2block,relative
to the ones in the player1 block, so they match Sonic’s sheet’s actual default orientation.
4. A second attack timer in joyEvent()
The D-pad already works for both characters; the attack button is still missing. The first
obstacle is that value and value2, declared inside handle_input(), stop existing as soon as
that function finishes executing. Since joyEvent() is a different function, it needs its own
local variables to read both joypads, even though the name and purpose are the same as in
handle_input(). With those variables declared, each player’s attack code is wrapped in an
additional condition that checks which of the two joypads generated the event:
void joyEvent(u16 joy, u16 changed, u16 state) {
u16 value = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1);
u16 value2 = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_2);
224

=== PAGE 231 ===
Figure 104: Sonic with the sprite orientation flipped while moving
// PLAYER1
if (value) {
if ((changed & BUTTON_B) && (state & BUTTON_B)) {
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_UPPER);
attack_timer = 1;
}
}
// PLAYER2
if (value2) {
if ((changed & BUTTON_B) && (state & BUTTON_B)) {
SPR_setAnim(player2, ANIM_SPIN);
attack_timer2 = 1;
}
}
}
Each player also needs their own timer and their own attack duration —attack_timer2 and
attack_duration2—, declared alongside the ones that already exist for player1, since both
characters can start attacking at different moments and completely independently of one
another.
There’s a detail here that isn’t obvious until you check it directly against the sprite sheet:
on Axel’s sheet, the attack animation is row number 3 (counting from zero), identified by the
constantANIM_UPPER.OnSonic’ssheet,theequivalentattackanimationisn’tonthesamerow:
it’s row number 7. This difference doesn’t follow any rule from SGDK or rescomp: it’s simply
the result of each sprite sheet having been laid out independently by whoever drew it, and
225

=== PAGE 232 ===
there’snorequirementthattwodifferentsheetssharethesameanimationorder. Inpractice,
this means the row number used for Sonic’s attack has to be defined with its own constant
—for example #define ANIM_SPIN 7— instead of reusing ANIM_UPPER, which in this program
still refers specifically to row 3 of Axel’s sheet.
Before reusing an animation constant for a second character, it’s worth checking
thecorrespondingspritesheetinsteadofassumingitsharesthesamelayoutasthe
firstone. Thisisn’tanSGDKrule: it’sadecisioneachartistmakeswhenorganizing
their sheet, and it varies from one sprite set to another.
5. A classic bug: calling handle_input() twice per frame
With joyEvent() complete, what’s left is to extend attack_function() —the function that de-
cideswhentheD-padshouldbesuspendedduringanattack—soitalsoaccountsforplayer2.
The most direct approach, copying the same pattern already used for player1, would be to
add a second, independent block with its own condition on attack_timer2:
// Version with the bug: do NOT use this form
void attack_function() {
if (attack_timer != 0) {
attack_timer++;
if (attack_timer == attack_duration) {
attack_timer = 0;
}
} else {
handle_input();
}
if (attack_timer2 != 0) {
attack_timer2++;
if (attack_timer2 == attack_duration2) {
attack_timer2 = 0;
}
} else {
handle_input();
}
}
Compilingandtestingthiscoderevealsanimmediateproblem: bothcharactersvisiblymove
faster than expected, roughly at twice the speed.
After the same number of frames, both Axel and Sonic end up displaced twice as far as ex-
pected.
Once identified, the cause turns out to be obvious in hindsight: handle_input() is a single
functionthatalreadycontains,internally,themovementcodeforbothplayers(player1’sand
player2’s together, since section 3). The code above calls that same complete function once
whenattack_timeriszero,andagain,separately,whenattack_timer2iszero. Inthenormal
situation —neither player attacking, both timers at zero— both conditions are true in the
same frame, so handle_input() runs twice in a row within the same frame. Since each run
moves both characters one more pixel in the pressed direction, the visible result is double
the displacement per frame for both of them, not just for one.
Thecorrectfixisn’ttocallhandle_input()conditionallyfromattack_function(),buttomove
thatconditioninsidehandle_input()itself,wrappingeachplayer’scodeblockinitsowncheck
226

=== PAGE 233 ===
Figure 105: Axel and Sonic moving at twice the speed due to the bug
of whether that player is allowed to move this frame:
void handle_input() {
u16 value = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1);
u16 value2 = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_2);
// PLAYER1
if (attack_timer == 0) {
if (value & BUTTON_RIGHT) {
player_x += 1;
SPR_setHFlip(player, FALSE);
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_WALK);
} else if (value & BUTTON_LEFT) {
player_x -= 1;
SPR_setHFlip(player, TRUE);
SPR_setAnim(player, ANIM_WALK);
}
// ... rest of player1's directions ...
}
// PLAYER2
if (attack_timer2 == 0) {
if (value2 & BUTTON_RIGHT) {
player2_x += 1;
SPR_setHFlip(player2, TRUE);
SPR_setAnim(player2, ANIM_WALK);
} else if (value2 & BUTTON_LEFT) {
player2_x -= 1;
227

=== PAGE 234 ===
SPR_setHFlip(player2, FALSE);
SPR_setAnim(player2, ANIM_WALK);
}
// ... rest of player2's directions ...
}
SPR_setPosition(player, player_x, player_y);
SPR_setPosition(player2, player2_x, player2_y);
}
Withthisrearrangement,attack_function()stopscallinghandle_input()altogether: itgoes
back to being limited purely to keeping track of both timers (incrementing them while the
attack is in progress, resetting them to zero once they finish), exactly the same role it had in
the previous chapter:
void attack_function() {
if (attack_timer != 0) {
attack_timer++;
if (attack_timer == attack_duration) {
attack_timer = 0;
}
}
if (attack_timer2 != 0) {
attack_timer2++;
if (attack_timer2 == attack_duration2) {
attack_timer2 = 0;
}
}
}
The call to handle_input() then goes back to being made exactly once, unconditionally, di-
rectly from the main loop, alongside the call to attack_function() (not replaced by it):
while (TRUE) {
handle_input();
attack_function();
SPR_update();
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
With this adjustment, the final result behaves as expected from the start: each character
moves at their normal speed with their own D-pad, and each player’s attack button only sus-
pendsthatplayer’smovement—withoutaffectingtheother—whiletheattackanimationplays
out in full.
Thelessonbehindthisbuggoesbeyondthisspecificcase: whenafunctionalreadyinternally
bundles the logic for several elements —in this case, the movement of both players inside a
single handle_input()— conditioning how many times that entire function gets called from
outsidecanhavesideeffectsoneverythinginsideit,notjustonthepartyoumeanttocontrol.
When a condition depends on a specific element (for example, whether player2 is attacking),
that condition has to be applied precisely to that element’s code, not to the whole function
that also contains the others.
228

=== PAGE 235 ===
An acknowledged limitation: this doesn’t scale beyond two
players
The pattern used throughout this chapter —adding a numeric suffix to each variable (value2,
player2_x, attack_timer2, attack_duration2) and duplicating each code block— works rea-
sonably well for two players, but it’s worth being honest about its limits: it doesn’t scale
comfortably to three or more. Each additional player would require manually repeating the
same set of loose variables and the same block of code inside handle_input(), joyEvent(),
and attack_function(), with the same risk of copy-paste errors already seen in section 2,
multiplied by each new character.
The natural path to generalizing this pattern beyond two players is to group all of a charac-
ter’sinformation—theirsprite,theirposition,theirattacktimer—intoasingledatastructure,
and replace the loose variables with an array of those structures (for example, Player play-
ers[MAX_PLAYERS]), so that adding another player is a matter of increasing the array’s size,
not writing a new block of code. This manual doesn’t develop that tool yet: C structs are
introduced later, when the enemy data for the capstone project is organized (chap. 53). That
same approach solves, in a much cleaner way, the scaling problem this chapter solved by
hand.
Review exercises
1. Axel and Sonic have the same numeric position coordinates but appear at different
heights on screen. Explain why this happens without it being a code bug.
2. Why is it worth creating a throwaway file, separate from main.c, before using find-and-
replacetoduplicateaplayer’scode? Whatspecificproblemdoesthatprecautionavoid?
3. Explain the difference between searching for player with the “whole word” option en-
abled versus disabled, and why that difference matters when renaming variables like
player_x and player_y.
4. A teammate adds a second character by reusing the ANIM_UPPER constant for its attack
animation, assumingitwillworkthesamewayitdidforAxel. Explainwhythiscanbea
mistake and what they should check before assuming two sprite sheets share the same
animation layout.
5. attack_function() calls handle_input() once for each player timer that reaches zero,
and both characters end up moving at twice the speed. Explain the exact cause of this
behavioranddescribethestructuralchange—notjustthespecificcodefix—thatsolves
it.
229

=== PAGE 236 ===
Chapter 34 — The Sound Chips -
YM2612 and PSG
HowtheMegaDrive’ssoundisorganizedunderthehood,beforewritingthefirstlineofcode
to play it
This part of the manual is devoted entirely to sound: how to play music and sound effects
with SGDK, and how to create those assets from scratch. Before getting there, it’s worth
spending an entire chapter understanding the hardware behind it, the same way chapter 2
paused on the VDP before showing the first line of graphics code. Chapter 1 already gave a
briefpreview: theMegaDrive’ssoundishandledbyaZilogZ80coprocessorthatcontrolstwo
separate chips — a Yamaha YM2612 FM synthesizer and a programmable sound generator
(PSG). This chapter picks that idea back up with the depth needed to understand, in the
following chapters, why SGDK’s sound functions are organized the way they are.
This is a purely conceptual chapter: there’s no code yet. The goal is to build a mental map
of “what each chip does and why two are needed,” so that when chapter 35 starts showing
how to play music with the XGM and XGM2 drivers, those design decisions already have a
foundation.
1. A separate sound subsystem, not a simple speaker
On a modern computer, playing a sound usually comes down to handing a series of numbers
to an audio card. On the Mega Drive, sound depends on a whole subsystem with its own
processor: the Z80. That architecture shapes, from the outset, how any sound function has
to be written in SGDK.
The 68000, which runs the game’s main program, doesn’t have direct, permanent access to
the sound chips’ registers. To write to them, it first needs to hand control of the data bus
overtotheZ80(abusarbitrationmechanism: whilethe68000hascontrol,theZ80ishalted,
and vice versa). The Z80, for its part, has its own 8 KB of memory (already mentioned in the
memory table in chapter 1) where it can run its own program completely independently of
the 68000.
Thisenablestwowaysofworkingwithsound,andunderstandingthedifferencehelpsexplain
why sound drivers exist at all:
• Direct control: the 68000 requests the bus from the Z80, halts it for an instant, writes
directlytotheYM2612orPSGregisters,andhandscontrolbacktotheZ80. It’ssimpleto
understand,buteverynoteoreverysoundchangerequireshaltingtheZ80andspending
68000 cycles in the process.
• AresidentprogramontheZ80: the68000loads,justonce(typicallyatgamestartup),
a small program into the Z80’s own memory. That program then runs autonomously,
reading commands from a shared memory area and translating them into the low-level
230

=== PAGE 237 ===
writesthattheYM2612andPSGneed. The68000nolongerhastohalttheZ80forevery
sound event: it’s enough to drop commands into that shared memory whenever needed.
The second approach is, in essence, that of a sound driver, and it’s the one SGDK uses.
Section 4 of this chapter comes back to this idea; for now it’s enough to keep this in mind:
whilethe68000keepsrunningthegame, theZ80hasitsownprogramdedicatedexclusively
to coordinating the two sound chips described below.
2. The YM2612: frequency modulation synthesis
TheYamaha YM2612isthechipresponsiblefortheMegaDrive’smostrecognizablesound:
those metallic timbres, bells, thick basses, and orchestral textures that set much of its music
apart from other consoles of the era. It has 6 channels, each capable of playing in stereo
(that is, with its own balance between the left and right audio channels).
The technique the YM2612 uses is called frequency modulation (FM) synthesis. In very
general terms — and this is already a deliberate simplification, without going into formulas
or the exact details of the circuitry — FM synthesis doesn’t record or play back a preexisting
sound wave: it generates one mathematically by combining several simple waves (usually
called“operators”)insuchawaythatsomemodulatethefrequencyofothers. Dependingon
how those operators are connected to each other and with what parameters (a combination
known as an “algorithm”), the result can sound like a bell, a bass, an organ, or a completely
artificial timbre with no equivalent in any real instrument. That’s where much of the Mega
Drive’s sonic identity comes from: the music doesn’t try to imitate real instruments with
recorded samples, but generates its own timbres from scratch, chip by chip. The details
of how a specific FM instrument is designed — how many operators are involved, what pa-
rameters exist, and how they’re adjusted — are covered in chapter 36, dedicated to music
creation; for now it’s enough to know that each of the YM2612’s six channels can have its
own instrument configured independently.
There’s a second function of the YM2612 worth knowing about from the start: it can play
backdigitized audio samples (PCM),thatis,recordedsoundinsteadofsynthesizedsound.
But that capability has a direct cost: playing PCM on the Mega Drive always occupies the
chip’s sixth channel, which then becomes unavailable for FM synthesis for as long as the
sample lasts. In practice, this means a game that uses digitized voices, recorded gunshots,
or sampled percussion is giving up, during those moments, one of the six available melodic
channels. This is a sound-design decision that has to be factored in from the moment the
composition is conceived, not a secondary technical detail.
3. The PSG: four channels inherited from the previous gen-
eration
The second sound chip is the PSG (Programmable Sound Generator), a much simpler
sound generator than the YM2612, inherited directly from the Master System, Sega’s previ-
ous 8-bit console. The PSG has 4 channels:
• 3 tone channels,capableofgeneratingsimplesquarewavesatagivenfrequency. This
is the same kind of “chiptune” sound characteristic of many 8-bit consoles and comput-
ers.
• 1 noise channel, designed to simulate explosions, percussion, wind, or any effect that
needs a more chaotic texture than a tuned note. In several PSG chips of this family,
the noise channel can also be synchronized with the frequency of the third tone chan-
nel, which makes it possible to generate noises with a recognizable pitch instead of flat
231

=== PAGE 238 ===
noise; this is a relatively fine-grained usage detail that will be revisited, if relevant, in
the chapter devoted to creating sound effects.
ThePSGdoesn’thavethetonalrichnessoftheYM2612(there’snoFMsynthesisortheability
to shape a complex timbre), but it’s much simpler to work with and uses far fewer resources
to produce a sound. Its most common use in Mega Drive games is twofold: reinforcing the
YM2612’s music with additional melodic lines or arpeggios (adding up to three more voices
to the six FM channels), and above all, handling short sound effects — jumps, shots, coins,
hits — without having to sacrifice any of the FM synthesizer’s more valuable six channels.
Thetwochipshavedifferentorigins: theYM2612isexclusivetotheMegaDriveand
didn’t exist in earlier Sega hardware, while the PSG is the same type of chip that
was already used in the Master System. That continuity is one of the mechanisms
that lets the Mega Drive run Master System games in its compatibility mode: that
legacy mode only needs the Z80 and the PSG, without relying on the YM2612.
4. Why a sound driver is needed
With two chips of such different characteristics — six FM channels with PCM capability on
oneside,foursimpletone-and-noisechannelsontheother—coordinatingbothfromscratch,
writing directly to their registers every time a change is needed, would be impractical for a
real game. A game needs to simultaneously play a background music track (which may be
using several YM2612 and PSG channels at once) and trigger specific sound effects (a jump,
ashot, an explosion)withoutthoseeffectscutting offorsteppingon themusicthat’splaying.
This is why SGDK doesn’t expose sound as a simple function that “writes to the chip,” but
rather through a sound driver: a program that runs on the Z80 (following the second ap-
proach described in section 1) and is responsible for deciding, at every moment, which chan-
nelofwhichchipisdoingwhat. Thegamecode,runningonthe68000,doesn’tneedtoknow
exactly which YM2612 register to write to in order to play a given note: it asks the driver
to “play this music” or “play this effect,” and it’s the driver that internally figures out how to
distribute those requests among the available channels, including what to do when a sound
effect needs a channel that’s currently occupied by the music.
SGDK includes more than one sound driver, with different capabilities and different data for-
mats — the most important ones are XGM and its successor, XGM2 — and choosing between
them is one of the first practical decisions that will come up in chapter 35. For now, the im-
portant thing is to hold on to the concept: the driver is the layer that translates the game’s
intentions(“playthissong,”“playthiseffect”)intothelow-level,channel-by-channelhandling
of two chips with very different rules from each other.
5. Thinking in channels, not just instruments
A practical consequence of everything above, and perhaps the most important idea to take
away from this chapter, is that composing or programming the sound of a Mega Drive game
forces you to think in terms of concrete channels, not just abstract instruments. On a
modern computer with practically unlimited audio synthesis, a composer can think “I need
a bass, a drum kit, two melodic voices, and a background layer” without worrying about
whether there’s physical room for all of that at once. On the Mega Drive, that question has a
strict numerical answer: there are six FM channels and four PSG channels, period.
This has very concrete effects on how a game’s music and sound are designed:
• If a song uses all six of the YM2612’s channels to sound with its full tonal richness,
there’s no FM channel left free for a sound effect that needs to play over the music
232

=== PAGE 239 ===
without interrupting it; that effect will have to be handled by the PSG, or the driver will
have to decide to temporarily sacrifice one of the music channels.
• If the game needs to play a digitized voice or a PCM effect, you have to plan ahead for
that to consume the YM2612’s sixth channel for as long as it lasts, and compose the
music with the awareness that this channel may not always be available.
• Reinforcing a song with an extra PSG channel only makes sense if that channel isn’t
simultaneously needed for the game’s sound effects at that same moment.
Inotherwords,theprogrammerandthecomposerofaMegaDrivegameendupjointlymak-
ing channel-allocation decisions very similar to the ones a graphics programmer makes with
VRAM or the number of sprites on screen: a fixed, scarce resource that has to be allocated
deliberately, rather than assuming that “everything that should sound, will sound.” This way
ofthinkingaboutsound—intermsofavailablechannelsandhowthey’resplitbetweenmusic
and effects — underlies the tools and functions presented starting in the next chapter.
Review exercises
1. Explain in your own words why the 68000 can’t simply write directly, at any moment, to
the YM2612 or PSG registers, and what role the Z80 plays in that process.
2. What’sthedifferencebetweenFMsynthesisandplayingbackrecordedaudio(PCM),and
whydoesthatdifferenceexplainmuchoftheMegaDrive’scharacteristicsonicidentity?
3. If a game needs to play a digitized voice effect while the background music is playing,
what consequence does that have for the YM2612’s available channels at that moment?
4. Why is the PSG said to be “inherited” from the Master System, and how does that fact
relate to the Mega Drive’s compatibility mode with games from that earlier console?
5. Explain why SGDK doesn’t expose sound as a function that writes directly to the chips,
but rather through a driver that runs on the Z80. What concrete problem does that
intermediate layer solve?
233

=== PAGE 240 ===
Chapter 35 — Music Playback -
XGM and XGM2 Drivers
Chapter 34 explained why the Mega Drive needs an intermediate sound driver: the YM2612
and the PSG are powerful but low-level chips, and programming them directly to play back
a full track—with all its channels, instruments, and PCM samples synchronized—would be
impractical for a game. SGDK solves that problem with two music drivers already built in:
XGM, the original one, and XGM2, added in an SGDK 2.00 update. This chapter compares
the two and walks through the functions needed to play music with each. The code itself is
short; what really deserves attention is the decision of which driver to use.
Prerequisites
• A working SGDK project, with resources.res and main.c, like the one used since the
early chapters of the manual.
• Anunderstandingofthegeneralstructureofaresources.resfilefordeclaringresources
(already covered in the chapters on graphics and maps).
• It helps to have read chapter 34, since this chapter assumes you already know what the
YM2612 and the PSG are and why a software driver is needed to handle them.
• No musical knowledge is required: this chapter is limited to playing back already-
composed tracks. Composing original music for the Mega Drive is covered in chapter
36.
1. Two drivers, one design decision
XGM is SGDK’s original music driver. It offers four PCM channels in total: one is normally
reserved for music, and the remaining three are available for sound effects.
XGM2wasaddedlater,inanSGDK2.00update,withaspecificgoal: reducingthefinalROM
size. In practice, music tends to be what takes up the most space on a cartridge, so any
savings there are significant. XGM2 achieves this in two ways: it uses smaller PCM samples
for sound effects, and it allows a single PCM sample to be shared across multiple tracks.
UnderXGM,ifthesamedrumsoundappearedinfourdifferenttracks,thatsamplehadtobe
includedfourtimesintheROM,oncepertrack;withXGM2it’sincludedonlyonce,andevery
track that needs it reuses it.
That advantage comes with a trade-off: XGM2 offers only three PCM channels in total (one
formusicandtwoforsoundeffects),onefewerthanXGM.Thismaymatterdependingonhow
manysimultaneoussoundsagameneeds,andit’sworthtakingintoaccountbeforechoosing
a driver for a project, since switching drivers later means redeclaring the audio resources.
234

=== PAGE 241 ===
These PCM channels are separate from the six FM channels of the YM2612 described in
chapter 34: the driver manages them independently, and this manual doesn’t go further into
the internal details of that management.
WhenXGM2wasintroduced,itgeneratedsomeexcitementinthecommunityovertwospecific
features: fade in/out and the ability to adjust the music tempo without having to manually
count frames. Of those two features, only fade in/out is actually exclusive to XGM2: tempo
adjustment already existed in the original driver, as shown later in this chapter.
2. Declaring the music resource in resources.res
Declaring a music track follows the same pattern as any other SGDK resource: first the type,
then a name to identify the track within the code, and finally, in quotes, the source file. For
the XGM driver:
XGM my_track "musica.vgm";
Both drivers require files in uncompressed VGM format; they do not accept compressed
formats such as MP3. If a downloaded file is in VGZ format (a compressed version of VGM),
it’s enough to decompress it with any common tool and then rename the resulting extension
from .vgz to .vgm.
If you’re going to use music from existing games in your own project, keep in mind
that a commercial project cannot include third-party music without authorization.
Non-commercialfanprojectstendtohavemoreleeway,butit’sworthcheckingthe
license of each track before distributing anything.
3. Playing music with the XGM driver
With the resource declared, starting playback takes a single line:
XGM_startPlay(my_track);
This call must be made only once, typically alongside the other initializations, after
SYS_init() and before the main game loop starts. A common mistake is placing it inside the
while(1): if that happens, the system would try to restart the track on every frame, instead
of letting it play normally.
int main(bool hardReset) {
SYS_init();
// ... other initializations ...
XGM_startPlay(my_track);
while (TRUE) {
// game logic, without calling XGM_startPlay() again here
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return 0;
}
235

=== PAGE 242 ===
4. Controlling the number of repeats: XGM_setLoopNumber()
Bydefault,XGM_startPlay()playsthetrackwith255repeats,whichinpracticeamountstoan
indefinite loop for most purposes. When different behavior is needed—for example, having a
titlescreenthemeplayjustonceandthenstop—youcanuseXGM_setLoopNumber(),specifying
the number of additional repeats desired:
XGM_setLoopNumber(0); // plays only once, without repeating
• -1 corresponds to the default behavior (255 repeats).
• 0 makes the track play exactly once.
• 1 plays it twice in total, and so on.
5. Adjusting the tempo: XGM_setMusicTempo()
XGM_setMusicTempo() allows changing the playback speed in real time. The default value is
60(60framespersecondonNTSC;50onPAL);halfthatspeedcorrespondsto30,anddouble
corresponds to 120:
XGM_startPlay(my_track);
XGM_setMusicTempo(120); // double speed
This function must be called after XGM_startPlay(), never before, otherwise it has no effect.
It’s rarely essential, but it can be useful in genres like shoot ’em ups, where it might make
sense to speed up the music as the ship’s speed increases or as more enemies appear on
screen.
6. Pausing and resuming: XGM_pausePlay() and XGM_resumePlay()
XGM_pausePlay()stopsplaybackwithoutresettingit,whichisusefulforexampleforcutscenes
or pause menus. XGM_resumePlay() picks the track back up right where it left off:
if (paused) XGM_pausePlay();
else XGM_resumePlay();
Unlike the previous functions, meant to be called only once before the main loop, these are
normally invoked inside the game loop, conditioned on some event such as a button press.
DuetothenatureoftheFMchip,resumingisn’talwaysperfect: somenotesmaybelostuntil
the next key event in the track itself.
7. Switching to the XGM2 driver
Moving from XGM to XGM2 doesn’t require restructuring anything: in resources.res it’s
enough to replace the keyword XGM with XGM2, leaving the rest of the line unchanged:
XGM2 my_track "musica.vgm";
In main.c, the function equivalent to XGM_startPlay() is XGM2_play():
XGM2_play(my_track);
The rest of the functions covered so far have direct equivalents with the XGM2_ prefix:
XGM2_setLoopNumber(), XGM2_pause(), and XGM2_resume() cover, respectively, the number of
repeats, pausing, and resuming, with the same behavior described for the original driver.
236

=== PAGE 243 ===
8. What’s truly exclusive to XGM2: fade in and fade out
Fade in and fade out is indeed an XGM2-exclusive feature, with no equivalent in the original
driver. The syntax is straightforward: XGM2_fadeIn() takes as a parameter the number of
frames the transition should last. At 60 frames per second, 120 equals 2 seconds:
XGM2_play(my_track);
XGM2_fadeIn(120); // 2-second fade in
XGM2_fadeOut() works analogously, with the same type of parameter, to fade the track out
insteadofcuttingitabruptly. Iftheeffectseemsbarelynoticeablewithlowvalues,increasing
the duration (for example to 240 frames, about 4 seconds) usually makes it more evident
during testing.
Review exercises
1. Explain the main advantage of XGM2 over XGM in terms of final ROM size, and the
specific mechanism that makes it possible.
2. What is the main disadvantage of XGM2 compared to the original driver, in terms of
available PCM channels?
3. Explain why the call that starts music playback should not be placed inside the game’s
main loop.
4. Of the functions covered in this chapter (play, pause, resume, adjust repeats, adjust
tempo, fade in/out), state which one is exclusive to XGM2 and which ones exist in both
drivers.
5. Describe the procedure for using, with either of SGDK’s two drivers, a music file down-
loaded in VGZ format.
237

=== PAGE 244 ===
Chapter 36 — Creating Music for
the Mega Drive
Chapter 35 showed how to play back, within an SGDK project, a music file that had already
beencomposed,usingtheXGMandXGM2drivers. Whatremainedpending,however,wasthe
previous step in the chain: where that music file comes from in the first place. This chapter
coversthatearlierstep,anditdoessowithaparticularitycomparedtotherestofthemanual:
notasinglelineofCcodeiswritten. Alltheworkhappensinanexternalcomposingprogram
calledDefleMask,designedspecificallyforcreatingmusictargetedatthesoundhardwareof
retro systems, the Mega Drive among them.
The goal of this chapter is modest: it does not aim to turn the reader into a composer, but
rather to show how to start experimenting with sound on the Mega Drive without needing
any prior musical training. For anyone who wants to go deeper into composition proper, par-
ticularlyintodesigningFMinstrumentsfromscratch,therearecommunitytutorialsdevoted
entirely to that subject, with more detail than this chapter can offer.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it’s worth having on hand:
• Having completed Chapter 35, “Playing Music: the XGM and XGM2 Drivers”: this chap-
terassumesyoualreadyknowwhatrolethemusicfileplayswithinanSGDKprojectand
how it’s played back once imported.
• HavingDefleMaskinstalled. Thereisapaidversionandafreelegacyversion;thelatter
isenoughforeverythingshowninthischapter,sothere’snoneedtobuytheapplication
just to follow along.
• Nopriormusicalbackgroundisrequired. Thischapterislimitedtoimportingandtrying
out instruments already created by other people, not composing from scratch.
1. Why this chapter doesn’t teach music composition from
scratch
Designing an FM instrument from the very first parameter (choosing algorithm, operators,
envelopes, and frequency modulation until arriving at a specific timbre) is beyond the scope
ofthisintroduction;theDefleMaskcommunitycoversthatinmoredetailintutorialsdevoted
entirelytothesubject. Ratherthanstartingfromzero,thischapterreliesoninstrumentsthat
have already been created, extracted from real game music, in the same way other chapters
of this manual use graphics or level maps from commercial games as practice material (see,
for example, Chapter 8 on creating graphics).
238

=== PAGE 245 ===
Thisapproachhasaconcretepedagogicaladvantage: itletsyouhearrightawaywhatawell-
designed FM instrument sounds like, the same kind that makes up the soundtracks of well-
known Mega Drive games, without yet needing the full technical vocabulary of the YM2612
chip (algorithms, operators, envelopes) presented in Chapter 34. Importing and playing ex-
isting instruments is, in that sense, a much more accessible entry point than starting with
design from scratch.
2. DefleMask: the tool used in this chapter
DefleMask is today one of the most widely used programs for composing music intended for
retro sound hardware, including the Mega Drive. Its interface follows the classic tracker
model: a pattern editor organized into columns, one per sound channel, with a virtual piano
available at the bottom for writing notes and trying out instruments interactively.
Figure 106: DefleMask welcome screen
DefleMask’s welcome screen on startup.
The columns of the pattern editor correspond directly to the Mega Drive sound hardware
channels already described in Chapter 34: the FM channels of the YM2612 chip (the sixth
of which can be reconfigured as a PCM channel) and the PSG channels, including the noise
channel. Seeing those channels represented as concrete columns in the editor helps make
thehardwaremodel,uptothispointrathertheoretical,tangible: eachnotewritteninagiven
column actually sounds through a specific channel of the real chip.
DefleMask’s pattern editor: the virtual piano sits at the bottom, and the columns above cor-
respond to the Mega Drive’s FM and PSG channels.
There is also a free legacy version of DefleMask, which retains all the functionality needed
to import instruments, write patterns, and play them back: none of the steps in this chapter
require the paid version.
239

=== PAGE 246 ===
Figure 107: DefleMask pattern editor
3. The instrument panel: importing an already-created in-
strument
Instead of creating an FM instrument from scratch, DefleMask lets you import an existing
one. At the top of the instrument panel there’s a small folder icon; clicking it opens a file
browser that lets you navigate to the folder where the downloaded instruments are stored.
Instrument panel with slot “0: Ins 0” still empty and the folder icon used to import an instru-
ment.
DefleMask recognizes two different instrument formats:
• .dmp: DefleMask’s native instrument dump format.
• .tfi: anotherinstrumentformatsupportedbytheprogram,usedbysomecollectionsof
instruments extracted from games.
When you select a file in either format, DefleMask loads it directly into the active instrument
slot, replacing the generic name (“Ins 0”) with the real name of the imported instrument.
An instrument already loaded into slot 0, replacing the initial generic “Ins 0”.
Pressing the “+” button on the same panel and repeating the file selection process lets you
add as many additional instruments as needed to the composition file.
4. Community instrument banks
To avoid depending on hand-made instruments, there are community instrument banks and
tutorials for DefleMask focused specifically on the Mega Drive, organized in different ways.
As an example of the kind of material you can find:
240

=== PAGE 247 ===
Figure 108: DefleMask instrument panel
Figure 109: Instrument loaded into slot 0
241

=== PAGE 248 ===
Aninstrumentbankextractedfromarcadegamesmightbeorganizedbycompany(forexam-
ple,separatefoldersforAtari,Capcom,Konami,Namco,andSega),withindividual.dmpfiles
inside each one. Inside the folder for a specific Mega Drive game, such as Golden Axe, you’ll
usuallyfindacollectionofinstrumentswithdescriptivenames(“BassDrum”,“Bell”,“Brass”),
ready to be imported as-is using the procedure from the previous section.
Figure 110: Instrument folder organized by company
Arcade instrument folder organized by company: Atari, Capcom, Konami, Namco, and Sega,
each with its own .dmp files.
There are also larger banks in circulation, organized by game title rather than by company,
with instruments in .tfi format extracted from the complete soundtrack of a specific game.
A bank of this kind might include, for example, a folder for Streets of Rage with files named
after the track and instrument of origin, making it possible to recreate the sound of well-
known themes from that soundtrack with fairly good fidelity.
Contents of the folder corresponding to Streets of Rage, with .tfi files named after the track
and instrument of origin.
In both cases, the way to bring the instruments into the project is the same one already
seen in section 3: the folder icon in the instrument panel, repeated as many times as needed
instruments.
5. Trying out instruments and exploring existing songs
With the instruments already loaded, the natural next step is to play them directly from the
virtual keyboard built into DefleMask, to hear how each one sounds in isolation and mentally
compareit to theoriginal song itcomes from. This ear-training exercise— identifying which
well-knownthemeaninstrumentbelongstoassoonasyouhearitplay—is,initself,auseful
way to get familiar with the characteristic timbre of the YM2612 and PSG combined, beyond
the technical vocabulary already covered in Chapter 34.
242

=== PAGE 249 ===
Figure 111: Streets of Rage instrument folder
Figure 112: Blank DefleMask project
243

=== PAGE 250 ===
MainscreenofablankDefleMaskproject,withtheFMandPSGchannels(includingthenoise
channel) available for the Mega Drive’s sound chip.
As additional practice, searching online for piano tutorials of a well-known theme (adding
termslike“tutorial”or“easypianotutorial”tothesearch)canserveasareferenceforrecre-
atingabasicversionofthatsonginsideDefleMask,notebynote,usingthealready-imported
instruments. It’salsocommontofindinthecommunitycompleterecreationsofclassicMega
DrivethemesmadeinDefleMask,withtheprojectfileavailablefordirectanalysis: reviewing
how an already-finished pattern is put together is often more instructive than starting from
scratch.
6. From DefleMask to SGDK: the missing link
Everything shown so far happens entirely within DefleMask, with no connection yet to an
SGDK project. Chapter 35 explained that XGM and XGM2 expect, as input, a file in VGM
format,alreadyconvertedtoeachdriver’sspecificformatusingthecorrespondingconversion
tools. ThatVGMfileisthefinaldestinationofacompositionmadeinDefleMask: theprogram
allows a finished project to be exported to that format, closing the loop between this chapter
and the previous one.
Theexactprocedurefor performingthatexport, whichspecificmenu orbuttoninDefleMask
to use, and which options are best chosen to maximize compatibility with XGM/XGM2, is not
documented in this chapter with the same level of detail as the rest of the workflow. Before
taking that final step, it’s worth reviewing DefleMask’s own documentation and, in case of
doubt about any specific export option, following the same verification standard this manual
applies to the rest of the code: if something isn’t confirmed with certainty, it shouldn’t be
casually assumed.
Review exercises
1. Explain the difference between the .dmp and .tfi instrument formats mentioned in this
chapter, and what type of bank each one usually comes from.
2. Describe the procedure for importing an already-existing instrument into DefleMask’s
instrument panel.
3. Why does this chapter rely on instruments extracted from existing games instead of
teaching how to design FM instruments from scratch? Relate the answer to the level of
detail of the YM2612 chip covered in Chapter 34.
4. What relationship do the columns of DefleMask’s pattern editor have with the Mega
Drive sound channels described in Chapter 34?
5. WhatfileformatconnectstheworkdoneinDefleMaskwithwhatwasexplainedinChap-
ter 35 about playing music with XGM/XGM2? Why is that conversion step essential
before being able to hear the composition within an SGDK project?
244

=== PAGE 251 ===
Chapter 37 — Programming
Sound Effects
Along with music, graphics, and animation, sound effects are one of the elements that bring
the most life to a game, even when they serve no gameplay function whatsoever. Think of a
platformerwherethecharactermakesasmallsoundwhilewalking,orwherecertainelements
ofthesceneryreactwithasoundeffectwhensteppedonortouched: noneofthataffectsthe
mechanics, but it reinforces the feeling that the represented world is real.
ThischaptercovershowtouploadsoundfilestotheROM,assignthemanidentifyingnumber
within the range reserved for effects, play them in response to controls, and — the most
importantpointofthechapter—howtomanagesoundchannelsandprioritieswhenseveral
effects might play at the same time.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• ReadChapter35,“MusicPlayback: theXGMandXGM2Drivers”: thischapterassumes
familiarity with the XGM driver and the resources.res file, since sound effects are also
declared there and played with functions from the same family.
• ReadChapter32,“ButtonControlsandEvent-BasedReading”: theexampleinthischap-
ter reuses that same joystick event-handling structure to trigger the effects.
• An understanding of using #define to associate readable names with constant numbers,
already covered in the chapter on sprite animation (Chapter 23).
1. Starting Point: Handling Several Buttons with Indepen-
dent if Statements
The example in this chapter starts from a joyEvent() function like the one in Chapter 32,
whichcheckswhetherbuttonsA,B,orCwerepressed. There’sanimportantdesigndetailin
that structure: the three buttons are checked with three independent if statements, never
with else if.
void joyEvent(u16 joy, u16 changed, u16 state)
{
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_A)
{
// play effect A
}
245

=== PAGE 252 ===
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_B)
{
// play effect B
}
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_C)
{
// play effect C
}
}
The reason for using independent if statements instead of else if is that, with else if,
only one sound effect could ever play at a time, even if the player presses two or three but-
tons simultaneously. With independent if statements, each button can trigger its own effect
regardless of the state of the others.
To illustrate the rest of the chapter, three example sound files are used, with generic names
you can replace with your own: sfx_shout.wav, sfx_rise.wav, and sfx_yell.wav. They don’t
needtobeoriginalorespeciallyelaboratesoundstofollowalongwiththechapter: anythree
short WAV files will do for experimenting with channels and priorities.
2. Uploading Sound Effects: the WAV Keyword in re-
sources.res
The first step in programming a sound effect is uploading it to the ROM by declaring it in
resources.res. Unlike music (which uses the XGM or XGM2 keyword, as seen in Chapter 35),
individual sound effects are declared with the WAV keyword, in uppercase, since the source
file must be in uncompressed .wav format.
After the keyword comes a freely chosen name to identify the resource within the code, fol-
lowed by, in quotes, the file name with its .wav extension. The last piece of data the declara-
tion requires is the sound driver associated with the effect:
WAV sfx_shout "sfx_shout.wav" XGM
WAV sfx_rise "sfx_rise.wav" XGM
WAV sfx_yell "sfx_yell.wav" XGM
This chapter uses the XGM driver instead of XGM2. Besides the fact that, as explained in
Chapter 35, XGM2 has one fewer PCM channel than XGM, XGM2 is a more recent addition
to SGDK and its documentation on effect playback is still even sparser. The procedure for
making sound effects under XGM2 would be similar to what’s shown in this chapter: declare
the resource with XGM2 instead of XGM and use the equivalent functions from that API. It isn’t
covered in detail here; it’s left as an exercise for anyone who prefers that driver.
Regardingtheexactformatthesource.wavfilemusthave(samplerate,bitdepth),thischap-
ter can’t provide concrete, verified figures. In practice, rescomp (the SGDK tool that pro-
cesses resources.res) usually accepts the WAV file as exported from a common audio editor
and automatically adjusts it to the format the sound driver needs; if you notice distortion or
unexpected noise when testing an effect of your own, it’s worth checking the quality of the
source file first before suspecting the console’s sound driver.
246

=== PAGE 253 ===
3. The Sound Effect Number Range: Why Start at 64
Within SGDK, each sound effect in a game receives a unique identifying number, within a
range from 0 to 255. However, the numbers from 0 to 63 are reserved exclusively for music,
so sound effects must use numbers between 64 and 255: a total of 192 available numbers,
more than enough for practically any game.
This distinction becomes clearer when using the playback functions: the declaration in re-
sources.res (seen in the previous section) identifies the sound file itself, while the number
defined in this section identifies the effect within the game’s playback system. They are two
related but distinct concepts.
4. Naming Effect Numbers with #define
Rather than using the numbers 64, 65, and 66 directly in the code — a practice that quickly
becomes confusing when you have to remember which number corresponds to which effect
—it’sbettertodefineareadablenameforeachonewith#define,followingthesamepattern
alreadyusedinChapter23forspriteanimation. It’salsoagoodideatochoosenamesdifferent
from those used in resources.res, so as not to confuse the file resource’s name with the
effect’s identifying number within the game:
#define SFX_SHOUT 64
#define SFX_RISE 65
#define SFX_YELL 66
5. Associating Each Effect Number with Its File: XGM_setPCM()
With the files already declared in resources.res and the effect numbers already defined, the
next step is to tell SGDK which file corresponds to which effect number. This is done with
the XGM_setPCM() function, which takes three pieces of data: the sound effect identifier (for
which the name defined with #define can be used directly instead of the number), the name
of the sound resource as declared in resources.res, and the size of the file in bytes.
For this last piece of data, rather than calculating the size manually, it’s best to use the C
language’sownsizeof()function,passingitthenameofthesoundresourceasanargument;
SGDK resolves that calculation automatically at compile time:
int main()
{
XGM_setPCM(SFX_SHOUT, sfx_shout, sizeof(sfx_shout));
XGM_setPCM(SFX_RISE, sfx_rise, sizeof(sfx_rise));
XGM_setPCM(SFX_YELL, sfx_yell, sizeof(sfx_yell));
// ... rest of initialization
}
These three calls go before the main loop, along with the rest of the game’s initialization.
247

=== PAGE 254 ===
6. Playing the Effect: XGM_startPlayPCM(), Priority, and
Channel
The last step is to tell the system when to play each effect, inside the joyEvent() function
presented at the start of the chapter. The function used is XGM_startPlayPCM(), which also
takes three pieces of data: the sound effect identifier (again, using the defined name instead
of the number), the effect’s priority, and the sound channel it should play on.
Priority is a value from 0 to 15, where 15 is the highest priority. This value determines what
happensiftwosoundeffectstrytoplayatthesametimeonthesamechannel. Asforthechan-
nel,theXGMdriverhasfoursoundchannelsintotal(SOUND_PCM_CH1throughSOUND_PCM_CH4),
but the first of these is usually reserved for music, so under normal circumstances it’s best
to avoid it and use channels 2, 3, or 4 for effects.
Assigning each effect to a different channel, with the same priority for all three:
void joyEvent(u16 joy, u16 changed, u16 state)
{
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_A)
XGM_startPlayPCM(SFX_SHOUT, 15, SOUND_PCM_CH2);
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_B)
XGM_startPlayPCM(SFX_RISE, 15, SOUND_PCM_CH3);
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_C)
XGM_startPlayPCM(SFX_YELL, 15, SOUND_PCM_CH4);
}
Whencompiledandtestedintheemulator,allthreesoundeffectsworkcorrectlyontheirown
andcanalsoallplayatthesametimeifallthreebuttonsarepressedatonce, sinceeachone
occupies a different channel. If the same button is pressed repeatedly, each new playback
cuts off the previous one and restarts it from the beginning, since both share a channel.
7. What Happens When Several Effects Share the Same
Channel
In a real game, it’s common to need more than three simultaneous sound effects — for ex-
ample, severaldifferentenemiesonscreenatonce—whicheventuallyforcesmorethanone
effect to share the same sound channel. To see what happens in that case, it’s enough to
modifythepreviousexamplesothatallthreeeffectsusethesamechannel, leavingthesame
priority for all three for now:
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_A)
XGM_startPlayPCM(SFX_SHOUT, 15, SOUND_PCM_CH2);
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_B)
XGM_startPlayPCM(SFX_RISE, 15, SOUND_PCM_CH2);
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_C)
XGM_startPlayPCM(SFX_YELL, 15, SOUND_PCM_CH2);
When compiled and tested, the result is that any new effect cuts off whatever was playing at
that moment on the same channel, regardless of which one it was: since all three have the
same priority, the most recent one always replaces the previous one.
248

=== PAGE 255 ===
8. Controlling Which Effect Wins: Adjusting Priority
Depending on the game’s design, it may not be desirable for any new effect to interrupt the
previous one on the same channel; priority allows this to be controlled more precisely. For
example, youcouldleavethefirsteffectwiththelowestpriorityofthethree(13), thesecond
at an intermediate level (14), and the third with the highest priority (15):
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_A)
XGM_startPlayPCM(SFX_SHOUT, 13, SOUND_PCM_CH2);
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_B)
XGM_startPlayPCM(SFX_RISE, 14, SOUND_PCM_CH2);
if ((changed & state) & BUTTON_C)
XGM_startPlayPCM(SFX_YELL, 15, SOUND_PCM_CH2);
Thepracticaleffectisthat,whilethepriority-15soundisplaying,nootherlower-priorityeffect
caninterruptitonthatchannel;thepriority-13one,ontheotherhand,canbeinterruptedby
both the priority-15 and priority-14 ones; and the priority-14 one can only be interrupted by
the priority-15 one.
Ahigher-priorityeffectcanalwaysinterruptalower-priorityoneonthesamechan-
nel; two effects of equal priority interrupt each other, with the most recent one
always winning.
The concrete way to apply channels and priorities in a real game depends entirely on each
project’sdesign. Asanexample,inanactiongamewithamaincharacter,itmightmakesense
toassignthecharacter’sowneffectsandtheir“takedamage”soundtoachannelwherethat
damage sound has high priority over their own attacks (so it isn’t lost while the character
is attacking), reserve another channel for enemies, and a third for scenery elements like
interactive objects or collectibles, so that these different types of sound don’t interrupt each
other.
There’s a common mistake in this kind of design: if an enemy’s attack and its final speech or
screamuponbeingdefeatedendupassignedtothesamechannelwiththeattackatahigher
priority, it can happen that, if the attack is still playing at the moment the enemy is defeated,
thesecondeffectgetscompletelycutoffandneverplaysatall. It’saneasyoversighttomake
and a hard one to notice during testing unless specific attention is paid to the assignment of
channels and priorities among effects that might coincide in time.
Review exercises
1. Explain why it’s best to use three independent if statements for buttons A, B, and C in
joyEvent(), rather than a chain of else if.
2. Why must sound effects in SGDK be numbered starting from 64 instead of from 0?
3. Describe the three parameters taken by XGM_setPCM() and the purpose of each one.
4. Iftwosoundeffectswiththesameprioritysharethesamechannel, whathappenswhen
both try to play at the same time? What about if they have different priorities?
5. Describe a game design situation (it can be a different genre or mechanic from the ex-
amples in this chapter) where a poor assignment of channel or priority could cause an
important sound effect to be silenced without it being obvious why.
249

=== PAGE 256 ===
Chapter 38 — Creating Sound
Effects
The previous chapter showed how to program sound effects that were already prepared for
a SGDK project: how to declare a .wav file with the WAV keyword in resources.res and how
to trigger it from code with the corresponding sound driver. This chapter deals with the step
before that: creating those sound files from scratch, using the free program Audacity.
Thefocushereisdeliberatelykeptnarrow,limitedtothespecificrequirementsandlimitations
of the Mega Drive’s sound hardware. For more general sound design techniques, how to
convincingly create the sound of a punch, a sword, or a synthetic voice, it’s worth turning
to more general sound design resources once the console’s own technical requirements are
understood, which is precisely the subject of the following sections.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to be clear on:
• How to declare a WAV resource in resources.res and play it from code with the corre-
sponding sound driver (chapter 37, “Programming Sound Effects”).
• Having Audacity installed (free) or an equivalent audio editor that lets you change a
track’s sample rate, convert it to mono, and export it as unsigned 8-bit PCM.
• Amicrophoneorsomeaudiosourcetorecordwith. It’salsoperfectlyvalidtostartfrom
an existing sound file instead of recording your own.
1. Where to draw inspiration from
Many sound effects from the classic Mega Drive library have a less handcrafted origin than
they might seem at first listen. The first Golden Axe, for example, is known for lifting sound
effectsdirectlyfrom1980sHollywoodmovies,whileitssequel,GoldenAxeII,withnoticeably
weaker enemy death effects, illustrates the other end of the spectrum.
The practical takeaway from these examples is simple: while taking sounds from movies
or someone else’s music might have gone unnoticed in the eighties, today it’s preferable
to create your own original sound effects, whether by recording your own voice, everyday
objects, or by turning to properly licensed sound banks. The rest of this chapter proceeds
from that premise: a sound effect is recorded from scratch with Audacity and adapted step
by step to the Mega Drive’s requirements.
250

=== PAGE 257 ===
2. Recording a sound effect in Audacity
ThefirststepistosetuptherecordingdeviceinAudacity,fromtheaudiosettingsmenu. It’s
besttochoosethemicrophoneastheinputsource,ratherthanthespeakers,whichwouldin-
steadbeusedifyouwantedtocaptureaudioalreadybeingplayedbackbythecomputeritself
(the sound from a video, for example). The project’s channel configuration and sample rate
canbeleftattheirdefaultvaluesforthisinitialrecording,usually44100Hz,becausethegoal
is to capture the best possible quality before adapting the file to Mega Drive’s requirements
later on.
Figure 113: Audacity’s Audio Setup menu, with the microphone selected as the recording
device
Audacity’s Audio Setup menu, selecting the microphone as the recording device instead of
the speakers.
Withthedevicealreadyconfigured,it’sjustamatterofpressingtherecordbutton,producing
the desired sound (a shout to serve as a “hit” effect for a beat ’em up, for example) and
pressing the stop button when finished.
3. Removing background noise (optional)
Anyonerecordinginanenvironmentwithnoticeablebackgroundnoise(traffic,fans,thehum
of some equipment) can turn to a noise reduction tool before continuing. The procedure
consists of first selecting a stretch of the recording where there’s no voice or desired sound,
only the background noise, and then, from the Effect menu, choosing Noise Removal and
Repair andthenthenoisereductionoption,pressingthebuttonthatcapturesthe“profile”of
that noise.
Audacity’s Effect menu, with the “Noise Removal and Repair” section expanded.
251

=== PAGE 258 ===
Figure 114: Audacity’s Effect menu with the Noise Removal and Repair section expanded
Oncetheprofilehasbeencaptured,theentirerecordingisselected(notjustthesilentstretch)
and the same tool is opened again, this time confirming the operation instead of capturing
the profile again, which applies the noise reduction to the whole file. This step is entirely
optional and depends on how much background noise is present in the original recording:
if the ambient noise is barely noticeable, it can be skipped without any appreciable loss of
quality.
4. Isolating the useful fragment of the recording
Afterrecording(andoptionallycleaningupthebackgroundnoise),it’sbesttoselectonlythe
audiofragmentyouwanttokeepasthesoundeffect,copyit,andpasteitintoanewAudacity
file, leaving behind any silence or discarded takes surrounding the useful fragment.
Selecting a specific fragment within several takes recorded on the same track.
BeforecontinuingwithanyconversionspecificallyaimedattheMegaDrive,it’sgoodpractice
to save the project at this point (using Save Project As) to keep a copy of the high-quality
version of the sound effect, in case you want to reuse it later in a context other than the
console: a PC version of the same game, for instance, or simply as a backup.
5. Adapting the file to Mega Drive’s requirements: resam-
pling and converting to mono
With the fragment already isolated and saved in its original version, the next step is to adapt
it to a format better suited to the Mega Drive’s sound hardware. The first adjustment is to
reduce the sample rate: selecting the whole fragment and using the Resample option from
252

=== PAGE 259 ===
Figure 115: Selecting a specific fragment among several takes recorded on the same track
the Tracks menu, the value is changed to 16000 Hz, considerably lower than the 44100 Hz
typical of a standard quality recording.
Audacity’s resampling dialog box, changing the rate to 16000 Hz.
The second adjustment is to convert the stereo track to mono, using the Mix Stereo Down to
Mono option from the same Tracks menu. After both steps, the track’s side panel confirms
the file’s new format, showing “Mono, 16000Hz”.
Thesetwovalues,monoand16000Hz,serveasareasonableruleofthumbforaMegaDrive
soundeffect,andaretheonesusedthroughoutthischapter,buttheydon’trepresentastrict
limitortheonlyvalidformat: goodresultscanbeachievedwithmoderatevariationsinsample
rate, depending on the effect and each project’s own judgment.
6. Adjusting the pitch (optional)
Audacity offers numerous additional effects that can be applied to a recording. One of them
is Change Pitch, which lets you alter a recording’s pitch without changing its speed. It’s the
samekindoftoolthat,accordingtoYuzoKoshirohimself,heusedtotransformhisownvoice
into that of Blaze, one of the characters in Streets of Rage.
The Change Pitch dialog box, with the Percent Change field set to -14.000, making the voice
deeper.
A Percent Change value of 0 leaves the pitch unchanged; a negative value makes the voice
deeper, and a positive one makes it higher-pitched. In practice, negative values tend to
produce reasonably convincing results, while positive values tend to produce an unnatural-
sounding high-pitched voice rather than a believable female voice; achieving that effect with
morenuancegenerallyrequiresadditionalprocessingthatgoesbeyondthescopeofthischap-
ter. For the sound effect used as an example here, no pitch change is applied, leaving the
253

=== PAGE 260 ===
Figure 116: Audacity’s resampling dialog box, changing the rate to 16000 Hz
Figure 117: The Change Pitch dialog box, with the Percent Change field set to -14.000
254

=== PAGE 261 ===
recording exactly as it originally sounded; the pitch adjustment remains a tool available for
whenever an effect calls for it.
7. Exporting the final file: unsigned 8-bit WAV format
The last step is to export the already-adapted file (resampled and converted to mono) in the
format SGDK expects. From the File menu, choose Export and then export as an audio file,
giving it whatever name you prefer. The most important detail in this step is the Encoding
field, which must be specifically set to “Unsigned 8-bit PCM”.
Figure 118: Audacity’s export dialog box, with Encoding set to Unsigned 8-bit PCM
Audacity’s export dialog box, with the Encoding field set to “Unsigned 8-bit PCM”.
Once exported with this encoding, the resulting .wav file can be added to the SGDK project
in exactly the same way seen in the previous chapter, declaring it with the WAV keyword in
resources.res:
WAV sfx_hit "sfx/hit.wav" FAR
8. Does the file always need to be converted manually?
It’s possible to add a .wav file to resources.res that doesn’t meet the recommended format
(in stereo and at a sample rate other than 16000 Hz, for example) and have the project still
compile. SGDK appears to perform some automatic conversion of .wav files at compile time,
even when they aren’t mono or at the recommended sample rate, as long as the file is rea-
sonably small; it isn’t precisely documented exactly how far this goes or under what exact
conditions that automatic conversion kicks in, so it’s best to treat it as a fallback behavior
rather than a reliable way of working.
255

=== PAGE 262 ===
That’s why, even though the final result might sound equivalent (the same voice effect, com-
paredinitsoriginalhigh-qualityversionandinitsversionmanuallyconvertedforMegaDrive,
can turn out to be practically indistinguishable once played back from the ROM in an emula-
tor), it’s generally best not to rely on that automatic conversion and to always carry out the
manual process described in this chapter, because there’s no guarantee that behavior will
work equally well in every case.
It’s also worth keeping source files as short and as low in quality as is acceptable, since this
reducesthefinalsizetakenupinsidetheROM,eventhoughSGDKalreadycompressesthese
sound files reasonably well. On that note, the XGM2 driver (covered in chapter 35, “Playing
Music: the XGM and XGM2 Drivers”) is often pointed to as being able to fit even smaller
sound effects than the original XGM driver used throughout this chapter, although the exact
comparison between the two formats hasn’t been verified here in detail and should be taken
as a general reference rather than a precise figure.
9. Adjusting the sound effect’s volume
One important recommendation to close out the chapter: SGDK doesn’t offer any way to
adjust a sound effect’s volume directly from code, so any volume adjustment has to be made
beforehand in the audio file itself, within Audacity. This is a common problem with sound
effects taken from external sources, which often turn out too quiet or too loud relative to the
rest of the game’s music and effects.
Figure 119: Audacity’s Effect menu with the Volume and Compression section expanded,
showing Amplify
Audacity’s Effect menu, with the “Volume and Compression” section expanded, showing the
Amplify option.
The procedure consists of selecting the entire sound effect and applying the Amplify effect,
foundwithintheVolumeandCompressioncategory. Thedialogboxletsyoupreviewtheresult
256

=== PAGE 263 ===
before applying the change, and by default it suggests the greatest amplification possible
without the sound becoming distorted (without clipping the signal).
Ifanevenhighervolumethanthedefaultsuggestionisdesired, theAllowClippingcheckbox
canbechecked,whichallowsraisingtheamplificationbeyondtherecommendedlimit. Doing
so, however, can cause part of the signal to clip and lose quality, so it’s generally best not to
enable that checkbox and to stick with the highest amplification level that doesn’t produce
clipping, leaving the final desired volume as a design decision that depends on the overall
balance between music and effects in each game.
A sound effect’s volume can’t be fixed afterward, once it’s already compiled into
the ROM: any adjustment has to be resolved in Audacity, before exporting the final
.wav file.
Review exercises
1. Describethetwomaintechnicaladjustments,beyondthecontentofthesounditself,that
should be applied to an audio recording before exporting it for Mega Drive.
2. Whatspecificencodingshouldbechosenwhenexportingthefinal.wavfilefromAudacity,
and why does that setting matter?
3. Why is it best to manually convert a sound effect to meet Mega Drive’s requirements,
rather than relying on SGDK’s automatic conversion at compile time?
4. Explain why a sound effect’s volume adjustment should be done in Audacity rather than
in SGDK code.
5. What risk does enabling the “Allow Clipping” option involve when using the Amplify ef-
fect, and why is it generally best to avoid it?
257

=== PAGE 264 ===
Chapter 39 — The Resource
Compiler in Depth
A unified view of rescomp: resource types, compression modes, and the organization of re-
sources.res
From Chapter 7 through Chapter 38, practically every chapter of this manual used rescomp,
SGDK’s resource compiler, to solve a specific problem: displaying a background, assembling
alargelevel,animatingasprite,playingmusic,ortriggeringasoundeffect. Ineachofthose
cases, rescomp appeared as a tool in service of a concrete goal, and each chapter explained
onlywhatwasneededforthatgoal. ThischapterclosesPartVIbytakingastepback: instead
of adding a new resource, it brings together in one place the complete map of what rescomp
can do, what each resource type is for relative to the others, and what general criteria are
worthapplyingwhenchoosingcompressionandorganizingaresources.resfilethat,inareal
project, ends up growing well beyond two or three lines.
There is no new code to learn in this chapter: every keyword, function, and structure that
appears here was already used in some earlier chapter. The goal here is different — this is
a reference chapter, a chapter of judgment, meant to be revisited whenever a real project
forces a decision, such as whether to compile a giant map with BEST or FAST, or how to keep
a three-hundred-line resources.res from becoming impossible to maintain.
1. What rescomp is and its place in the pipeline
Chapter 7 first introduced the central idea: a graphic, audio, or level resource does not auto-
matically become available inside a Mega Drive program. Before it can be used from main.c,
it has to be declared in a text file — by convention, resources.res, inside the project’s res
folder — and left for rescomp to process during compilation.
The full circuit always has the same shape, regardless of the type of resource involved:
1. A source file (PNG, WAV, VGM, TMX, depending on the type) is placed in the project’s
res folder.
2. A line in resources.res declares the resource: its type, a name chosen by the program-
mer,thepathtothesourcefile,and,dependingonthetype,additionalparameters(com-
pression, frame size, sound driver, etc.).
3. When the project is compiled, rescomp reads resources.res, processes each source file,
andgeneratestwonewfiles,resources.handresources.c,withintheprojectstructure.
4. main.c includes resources.h and, from that point on, can refer to each resource by the
name given to it in the .res file, as if it were a global variable already initialized with
the data from the original file.
5. Theprocessedcontent—alreadyinthebinaryformatexpectedbytheMegaDrivehard-
ware, and compressed as indicated — ends up embedded in the final ROM (rom.bin)
258

=== PAGE 265 ===
when the project is linked.
AsChapter7alreadypointedout,the.resfileisthesourcethatgetseditedbyhand,whilere-
sources.h/resources.c are products generated automatically on every build: they are never
editeddirectly,andanychangehastobemadeinthesource.resfile. Also,anewlydeclared
resource name is not available to the editor or to the compiler for main.c until the project is
saved and built at least once.
2. The resource types seen in this manual
Thetablebelowbringstogethereveryresourcetypeusedbythismanualsofar,showingwhat
each one generates and the chapter in which it first appeared. It is not an exhaustive list of
everything rescomp supports — some additional types, such as those related to custom text
fonts, fall outside the scope of this manual — but it covers the core resources for graphics,
levels, and sound.
Type What it generates First used
IMAGE A complete Image structure: Chapter 7
tileset, tile map, and palette,
all together, intended for a
graphic of up to 512×256
pixels that gets drawn in one
shot with
VDP_drawImageEx().
TILESET A set of unique 8×8-pixel Chapter 11
tiles extracted from an
image, discarding duplicates
and — with the ALL option —
also mirror images, to be
loaded with
VDP_loadTileSet().
PALETTE The color data (.data) of an Chapter 11
image, on its own, for cases
where the main resource
doesn’t include its own
palette.
MAP A MapDefinition structure Chapter 11
with the complete tile layout
of a level, referencing an
already-declared TILESET,
used to build a scrollable
map with MAP_create() and
MAP_scrollTo().
TILEMAP A TileMap structure, Chapter 12
generated from a .tmx file
exported by Tiled, with the
width, height, and list of tile
indices for a layer. It can be
combined with
TILESET/PALETTE and
MAP_create(), or traversed
directly for small maps
without scrolling.
259

=== PAGE 266 ===
Type What it generates First used
SPRITE A SpriteDefinition Chapter 21 (declaration) /
structure, with one or more Chapter 22 (preparing the
animation frames organized source sheet)
by row, meant to be used
with the sprite engine
(SPR_addSprite(), etc.)
rather than with the plane
functions.
XGM A music track for SGDK’s Chapter 35
original audio driver,
produced from an
uncompressed VGM file.
XGM2 An equivalent music track Chapter 35
for the newer driver, with a
smaller ROM footprint at the
cost of one fewer PCM
channel.
WAV An individual sound effect Chapter 37
produced from an
uncompressed .wav file, tied
to one of the two music
drivers (XGM or XGM2) so it
can be played through a
PCM channel.
Looking at the table as a whole, a pattern emerges that was already hinted at chapter by
chapter: rescompdoesn’tofferasingle“graphics”resourcetypeorasingle“sound”resource
type, but rather variants designed for different usage scenarios. IMAGE and SPRITE bundle
everythingneededintoasingledeclarationbecausethey’redesignedforthesimplecase: one
screen,onecharacter. TILESET,MAP,TILEMAP,andPALETTE,ontheotherhand,splitthosesame
pieces apart because a large level needs to share tiles across many positions and, eventually,
across several maps. Something similar happens with sound: XGM/XGM2 handle the complete
track with their own channel management, while WAV handles the one-off effect triggered in
response to a game event. Choosing the right resource type is, in practice, the first design
decision for any new graphic or sound, even before thinking about compression.
3. Compression modes, in a unified view
Several of the resource types from the table above — IMAGE, TILESET, MAP, SPRITE — accept
a compression field, and Chapters 7 and 21 already introduced, separately, the same three
alternatives:
• NONE: the resource is included uncompressed. It takes up more space in ROM, but re-
quires no decompression work at runtime: the data is already in the final format the
hardware expects.
• FAST: a lighter compression algorithm, which produces a smaller file than NONE but not
as compact as BEST, in exchange for decompression that is quick and cheap in terms of
CPU at runtime.
• BEST: the mode that produces the smallest file. In rescomp’s documentation this corre-
sponds to the APLIB algorithm, though in recent versions of SGDK the same keyword
mayalsoimplyanautomaticselectionofwhicheveralgorithmbestsuitseachparticular
260

=== PAGE 267 ===
resource — a behavior Chapter 21 already pointed out, and one worth checking against
the actually installed SGDK version before assuming BEST is always synonymous with
“the most aggressive compression and the slowest to decompress.”
The criterion for choosing among the three doesn’t change depending on the resource type:
what changes is how many times per second that resource will be decompressed during the
game, and how much CPU time is available at that moment.
• Aresourcethatgetsdecompressedonlyonce,typicallywhenloadingascreenoralevel
— a static background, the tileset and map of a full level, a menu’s palette — can afford
the cost of BEST with no perceptible impact: the decompression happens once, during
a loading screen or a transition, and after that the data already lives decompressed in
VRAMorinworkingRAM.ThisisexactlythecaseoftheIMAGEresourcefromChapter7
and the TILESET/MAP from Chapter 11: there’s no practical reason not to use BEST there.
• A resource that gets decompressed many times per second — the central case being
an animated sprite, which changes frames several times per second and may need to
decompress data on every change — pays the cost of BEST over and over, frame after
frame. Chapter21alreadyshowedthatthiscostismeasurable: inaprojectwithseveral
animated characters on screen at once, switching their sprites from FAST to BEST can
causeanoticeabledropinframerate. Forthistypeofresource,FASTisusuallythemore
sensible choice, reserving BEST for cases where ROM size is a more pressing constraint
than speed.
• NONE makes sense in two specific situations: when the resource is already so small that
compressing it wouldn’t yield a meaningful saving, or when the fastest possible access
isneededandthere’snoroomevenforthelightcostof FAST—forexample,datathatis
read extremely frequently and where every additional CPU cycle is critical.
The question worth asking about each resource, then, is not “how big is this file?” but “how
many times per second does it need to be decompressed, and how tight is the CPU budget
at that moment in the game?” A huge level background, even though it’s a heavy file, gets
decompressed only once when entering the level and can safely go in BEST; a small sprite, if
it’s animated constantly, may justify FAST even though it weighs much less in raw terms.
This same trade-off between space and speed reappears, in another form, in the alternative
already mentioned in Chapter 21 for sprite compression: loading every possible animation
frameintoVRAMupfront,therebyavoidinganydecompressionduringgameplay,atthecost
of permanently occupying the VRAM space those frames need — space that then becomes
unavailableforanythingelse. Thisisn’tabetterorworsealternativetoadjustingcompression:
it’s the same space-versus-speed trade-off, resolved at the opposite end of the problem.
4. Organizing a growing resources.res
Every example in this manual, chapter after chapter, worked with a resources.res of just a
few lines, designed to introduce one resource at a time. A real project ends up accumulating
dozens or hundreds of lines: tilesets and maps for several levels, sprite sheets for every
characterandenemy,amusictrackperscene, andalonglistofsoundeffects. Withoutsome
extra care, that file quickly becomes hard to navigate and maintain, especially on a team of
more than one person.
The safest way to keep that file organized, within what this manual can confirm based on
the information already used in earlier chapters, is a discipline of organization within a sin-
gle resources.res file, rather than relying on splitting resource declarations across several
separate files. Specifically:
• Group lines by area of the game,withacommentmarkingeachblock—forexample,
one block for the playable character’s resources, another for each level, another for the
261

=== PAGE 268 ===
interface, and another for audio — in the same order in which it makes sense to review
them.
• Adopt a consistent prefix in resource names that identifies which area or which
leveleachonecomesfrom—forexample,lvl1_tileset,lvl1_map,lvl1_paletteforthe
firstlevel, and player_walk, player_idle forthe character’s animation sheets— so that
the resource name is already readable in main.c’s code without having to go back to
resources.res to remember what it corresponds to.
• Keep related resource lines together, as already shown in Chapter 11 with TILESET,
PALETTE,andMAPforthesamemap,orinChapter12withTILESET,PALETTE,andTILEMAP
for a level designed in Tiled: declaring those lines one right after another makes the
relationship between them far clearer than scattering them across the file.
• Review compression at the end of each block, since it’s easy to copy and paste a
line from an already-declared resource as a starting point for a new one and forget to
adjustthecompressiontomatchtheactualusecaseforthatnewresource(forexample,
copying the line for a background compressed with BEST as the basis for a sprite that
would actually need FAST).
Asforthepossibilityofsplittingresourcedeclarationsacrossmorethanone.resfileperarea
of the game — a reasonable idea in the abstract, especially in large projects — this manual
cannot confirm with certainty, based on what has been covered in earlier chapters, whether
rescompnativelysupportsprocessingmultiple.resfilesorwhethersomeadditionalinclusion
mechanismbetweenthemwouldbeneeded. Beforeassumingthatpathisavailable,it’sworth
checkingagainstthedocumentationfortheinstalledSGDKversion;organizingbyblocksand
prefixes within a single file, on the other hand, is a recommendation that doesn’t depend on
anyuncertainfeatureofthetool,andit’salreadyenough,inpractice,tokeepasizableproject
organized.
Review exercises
1. Without looking at the table in Section 2, list the nine resource types covered in this
manual and, for each one, the chapter where it was first used.
2. AteammatedeclaresthetilesetandmapofafulllevelwithFASTcompression,“soitloads
faster,”andthemaincharacter’sanimatedspritewithBEST,“tosavespace.” Explainwhy
thatchoiceisprobablybackwards,basedonthischapter’sspace-versus-speedcriterion.
3. WhydoesaMAPresourceadditionallyneedaseparatelydeclaredPALETTEresource,while
an IMAGE resource doesn’t need one?
4. ExplaininyourownwordsthedifferenceinpurposebetweentheTILESET/MAPresources
(Chapter 11) and TILEMAP (Chapter 12), and in what situation you would choose each
one.
5. Propose an organization scheme (blocks and name prefixes) for the resources.res of
a platform game with three levels, a playable character with several animations, two
different enemies, and music and sound effects specific to each level.
262

=== PAGE 269 ===
Chapter 40 — Level Collision for
a Top-Down 2D Game
With backgrounds, large maps, sprites, the camera, controls, and sound already covered,
there’s one problem left that shows up in practically any game with free movement: keeping
the character from walking through walls, furniture, or any other obstacle in the scene. This
chapter opens Part VII of the manual, dedicated to physics and collisions, and builds a level
collision system from scratch for a game viewed from above, in the style of the early Zelda
titles.
Theexampleinthischapterreusesthesingle-screenroomscene(320×224pixels)withbeds,
furniture, and walls as obstacles. That scene, with its narrow gaps between objects, works
as a good stress test for the code we’re about to build: if the collision correctly resolves the
tightcornersbetweentwonearbypiecesoffurniture,itwillhavenotroublewiththesimpler
cases.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have already covered:
• Chapter6, ondatatypes(u8, u16, s16, const)andtheMegaDrive’smemoryconstraints.
• Chapter 13, on creating maps with 16Tile, since this chapter reuses that workflow to
generate an additional layer.
• Chapter21,ondisplayingsprites,andPartIIIingeneral,particularlyChapter24onthe
2D camera: the camera code from that chapter is reused here unmodified.
• Anunderstandingofwhatanarrayis: avariablecapableofstoringseveralvaluesofthe
same type, accessible via a numeric index starting at 0.
1. Where to place the collision box within the sprite
The first conceptual step, before writing a single line of code, is deciding where the colli-
sion box will sit within the character’s sprite: the rectangle whose four corners are checked
against the map to decide whether a movement is valid. That box doesn’t have to match the
full sprite; in fact, it’s almost always better for it to be smaller.
Foratop-downcharacter,itusuallyworksbesttoplaceitaroundthefeetratherthanoverthe
entiresprite. Thatway,thecharactercanvisuallyoverlapwiththetopofapieceoffurniture
or the headboard of a bed without that counting as an actual collision — something already
possiblethankstotilepriority,coveredinChapter15: atilewithprioritycanbedrawnontop
of the sprite even though, in the pixels further down, the character is still physically blocked.
263

=== PAGE 270 ===
Figure 120: The character sprite with an overlaid box marking the collision box
The reference box marks where the collision box will be placed: around the character’s feet,
smaller than the full sprite.
2. A second map layer, dedicated solely to collision
The core technique in this chapter is to create, within the same 16Tile project used for the
background (Chapter 13), a second layer dedicated exclusively to collision. That layer uses
itsowntileset,completelydifferentfromthegraphicalone: afileof16blocksof16×16pixels,
each a distinct flat color. Each color will represent a type of collision.
For the purposes of this chapter, two colors are enough: one (black, for example) for a free
tile,throughwhichthecharactercanmovewithoutrestriction,andanother(red,forexample)
for a fully solid tile. The remaining 14 colors in the tileset stay available for more elaborate
collision types that aren’t needed yet: a water tile passable only with certain equipment, or
a one-way tile that lets you drop down a ledge without being able to climb back up, like the
ones found in several classic games from that era.
With the layer created and named (collision, for example), the painting itself works exactly
like any other 16Tile layer you’ve already used: select the red block and paint it over every
map tile that should behave as solid, leaving the rest in the color that represents “free.” The
layer’s visibility icon (shaped like an eye) lets you toggle between viewing it opaque, semi-
transparentoverthebackground,orhidden,whichmakesiteasiertopaintthecollisionwhile
still seeing the actual background as a reference.
Painting the collision layer at reduced opacity, to keep seeing the actual background as a
reference while placing the solid tiles.
264

=== PAGE 271 ===
Figure 121: The semi-transparent collision layer over the background
3. Exporting the layer as a collision array
Before exporting, the collision layer needs a special setting within 16Tile’s layers panel: an
option that tells the tool this particular layer should be exported as a data array rather than
as a graphical background. When you export the full project, the result is two quite distinct
files: oneforthebackgroundlayer(animage, justliketheonesseeninearlierchapters)and
another for the collision layer, which is a plain text file with C array syntax, ready to paste
into the project: a series of 1s (solid tile) and 0s (free tile), one per map tile, in row order.
Automating this step is one of the reasons 16Tile becomes especially valuable as levels grow
larger: writing the collision array by hand, tile by tile, is slow and error-prone, especially on
maps bigger than a single screen, like the ones worked with using MAP_create() in Chapter
11.
4. The collision array in main.c: const u8, not u16
Thetextfileexportedby16Tiledeclaresthearrayasu16bydefault. Sinceinthisexampleits
onlypossiblevaluesare0and1,it’sworthshrinkingittou8,whichtakesuphalfthespacein
ROM without losing any information: for a 320×224 map (20×14 tiles, 280 elements), that’s
already 280 bytes saved, and it scales proportionally with the size of the level.
The second adjustment, even more important, is declaring the array as const, as explained
in Chapter 6 on data types and memory. A value marked const records in the code that
it won’t change during gameplay, and in practice it makes the compiler place that array in
ROM instead of copying it to RAM, a far scarcer resource on this console (only 64 kilobytes
total). Since the collision map never changes during the game, it’s a perfect candidate to
live permanently in ROM. There’s no published measurement confirming how many cycles it
coststoreadfromROMinsteadofRAMforanaccesslikethis,soit’sworthnotassumingthe
265

=== PAGE 272 ===
differenceisnegligible;eitherway,declaringthearrayasconstcarriesnopracticaldownside
and does save real RAM, so it’s the recommended way to declare it.
// Room collision array (320x224 px = 20x14 tiles = 280 elements).
// Generated by 16Tile from the map's collision layer,
// shrunk to u8 and declared const so it lives in ROM (see Chapter 6).
const u8 level_col[] = {
1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,
1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,1,
1,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,
1,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,
// ... the rest of the rows, up to the full 14 rows of 20 columns
1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,
};
5. Two helper constants
To work comfortably with the array, two additional constants are needed.
Thefirstisthearray’shorizontallengthintiles: howmanyvaluesthereareineachrowbefore
movingtothenext(20, inthismap). Thatvaluecanexceed 255inlevelslargerthan asingle
screen, like the ones in Chapter 11, so it’s worth declaring it as u16 from the start instead of
u8, even though in this example it’s well below that limit:
const u16 level_col_width = 20;
The second constant attaches a readable name to the numeric value that represents a solid
tile within the array, using the same #define technique already used in earlier chapters for
sprite animations:
#define SOLID_TILE 1
UsingSOLID_TILEinsteadoftherawnumber1inthecodemakesanyfuturecomparisonmuch
morereadable,especiallyifothertiletypesgetaddedlater(water,slopes,andsoon)andyou
need to remember which number corresponds to each one.
6. The collision box offsets
player_x and player_y always represent the top-left corner of the full sprite, not of the col-
lision box defined in section 1. To get that box’s actual coordinates, you need to calculate,
for each of its four sides, the pixel distance to the corresponding edge of the sprite. Those
four values are measured once, on the reference sprite, and declared as constants alongside
PLAYER_WIDTH and PLAYER_HEIGHT:
#define PLAYER_WIDTH 32
#define PLAYER_HEIGHT 32
#define PLAYER_COLBOX_LEFT 10
#define PLAYER_COLBOX_RIGHT 23
#define PLAYER_COLBOX_TOP 18
#define PLAYER_COLBOX_BOTTOM 31
266

=== PAGE 273 ===
7. Setting up collision()
Allthelogicinthischapterisconcentratedinanewfunction,collision(),whichfollowsthe
same pattern already used for handle_input() and camera(): a prototype declared near the
topofthefile,thefunctioncalledinsidethemainloop(rightafterhandle_input()andbefore
camera()), and the body written at the end of the file.
while (TRUE)
{
handle_input();
collision();
camera();
SPR_update();
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
To verify each calculation as the code is written, it’s worth reusing the on-screen debugging
technique already seen in Chapter 6: a text buffer and a call to VDP_drawTextBG() inside
collision(), continuously displaying the value of some variable of interest.
Inside collision(), the first step is to calculate the box’s actual coordinates in pixels on the
map,byaddingeachoffsettothesprite’scoordinate(convertedfromfix32toanintegerwith
F32_toInt()):
s16 player_left_collision_coord = F32_toInt(player_x) + PLAYER_COLBOX_LEFT;
s16 player_right_collision_coord = F32_toInt(player_x) + PLAYER_COLBOX_RIGHT;
s16 player_top_collision_coord = F32_toInt(player_y) + PLAYER_COLBOX_TOP;
s16 player_bottom_collision_coord = F32_toInt(player_y) + PLAYER_COLBOX_BOTTOM;
8. From pixels to tiles: dividing by 16 with a bit shift
Thecollisionarraydoesn’tworkinpixelsbutin16×16tiles,sothecoordinatesaboveneedto
beconvertedintoatilecolumnorrownumberbydividingthemby16. Asalreadyexplainedin
Chapter6,dividingbyapowerof2isbestdonewithabitshiftinsteadofthedivisionoperator,
since the Mega Drive’s CPU handles generic division poorly: dividing by 16 is equivalent to
shifting four positions to the right (>> 4).
s16 xtilecoord_left = player_left_collision_coord >> 4;
s16 xtilecoord_right = player_right_collision_coord >> 4;
s16 ytilecoord_top = player_top_collision_coord >> 4;
s16 ytilecoord_bottom = player_bottom_collision_coord >> 4;
9. From tile coordinates to array index
Withthetilecoordinatesforeachcorneralreadycalculated,thenextstepistotranslatethem
intothecorrespondingindexwithinthelinearcollisionarray,whichnumbersits280elements
continuously from 0 to 279, row by row. The formula is:
index = (row × level_col_width) + column
A couple of concrete examples help confirm the formula is correct: a tile in column 0, row 1
gives(1 × 20) + 0 = 20; atileincolumn2,row6gives(6 × 20) + 2 = 122. Bothmatchthe
real position of those tiles within the array.
267

=== PAGE 274 ===
Applying this formula to the four corners of the collision box gives the four indices that need
to be looked up, and with them, the collision type at each corner:
u16 array_index_topleft_colbox = (ytilecoord_top * level_col_width) +
↪ xtilecoord_left;
u16 array_index_topright_colbox = (ytilecoord_top * level_col_width) +
↪ xtilecoord_right;
u16 array_index_bottomleft_colbox = (ytilecoord_bottom * level_col_width) +
↪ xtilecoord_left;
u16 array_index_bottomright_colbox = (ytilecoord_bottom * level_col_width) +
↪ xtilecoord_right;
u8 topleft_col_type = level_col[array_index_topleft_colbox];
u8 topright_col_type = level_col[array_index_topright_colbox];
u8 bottomleft_col_type = level_col[array_index_bottomleft_colbox];
u8 bottomright_col_type = level_col[array_index_bottomright_colbox];
DisplayingtheselastfourvariableswithVDP_drawTextBG()whilethecharactermovesaround
the scene lets you visually confirm that the value switches to SOLID_TILE when approaching
a piece of furniture or a wall, and goes back to 0 over open floor.
10. Boolean movement variables
With all the collision information available, the next step is to use it to control actual move-
ment. The approach is to introduce four boolean variables, one per direction, defaulting to
false:
bool player_move_left = FALSE;
bool player_move_right = FALSE;
bool player_move_up = FALSE;
bool player_move_down = FALSE;
In handle_input(), instead of moving the character directly when a D-pad key is detected as
pressed, each direction now toggles the corresponding boolean on or off: TRUE if the button
ispressed,FALSEifitisn’t,oriftheoppositedirectionisbeingpressed. Theactualmovement
is moved entirely into collision(), which from now on is the only function responsible for
deciding whether the character actually moves.
if (JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1) & BUTTON_LEFT)
{
player_move_left = TRUE;
player_move_right = FALSE;
}
else if (JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1) & BUTTON_RIGHT)
{
player_move_right = TRUE;
player_move_left = FALSE;
}
else
{
player_move_left = FALSE;
player_move_right = FALSE;
}
// The same pattern repeats for up and down.
268

=== PAGE 275 ===
11. Resolving leftward movement
Inside collision(), an if (player_move_left) block brings together three steps in order:
movethecharactertotheleft,calculatewhetherthatmovementcausesthetop-leftorbottom-
left corner of the collision box to land on a solid tile, and if so, correct the position so it ends
up flush against the edge of that tile. Since all of this happens within the same animation
frame, the player never actually sees the character visually penetrating the obstacle before
being pushed back.
It’s worth moving the pixel, tile, and index calculations for the left side into this block, since
there’s no point calculating them if the character isn’t moving in that direction:
if (player_move_left)
{
player_x = F32_sub(player_x, FIX32(PLAYER_SPEED));
s16 left_coord = F32_toInt(player_x) + PLAYER_COLBOX_LEFT;
s16 top_coord = F32_toInt(player_y) + PLAYER_COLBOX_TOP;
s16 bottom_coord = F32_toInt(player_y) + PLAYER_COLBOX_BOTTOM;
s16 xtile_left = left_coord >> 4;
s16 ytile_top = top_coord >> 4;
s16 ytile_bottom = bottom_coord >> 4;
u16 idx_topleft = (ytile_top * level_col_width) + xtile_left;
u16 idx_bottomleft = (ytile_bottom * level_col_width) + xtile_left;
if (level_col[idx_topleft] == SOLID_TILE || level_col[idx_bottomleft] ==
↪ SOLID_TILE)
{
// Align the left edge of the collision box (not the sprite)
// with the right edge of the solid tile it collided with.
s16 blocked_coord = (xtile_left << 4) + 16 - PLAYER_COLBOX_LEFT;
player_x = FIX32(blocked_coord);
}
}
The calculation for the bounce-back position takes the tile column where the obstacle lies,
multiplies it by 16 using a left bit shift (multiplying by a power of 2 allows the same shortcut
as dividing), adds another 16 — the width of a tile, to land on its right edge instead of its left
edge — and finally subtracts the collision box offset, since player_x describes the position
of the full sprite, not the box. Skipping that final subtraction leaves the character pushed
noticeably farther from the obstacle than expected, so it’s worth paying attention to it: the
correct result stops the character exactly where the green reference collision box touches
the edge of the furniture, with no visible extra bounce.
12. Right, up, and down
Rightward movement follows the same logic as leftward movement, with two differences: it
uses the coordinates of the box’s right corners instead of the left ones, and its bounce-back
formula doesn’t need to add the full width of a tile, since aligning the box’s right edge with
the solid tile’s left edge doesn’t require that extra adjustment (though it does still subtract
the corresponding offset, in this case PLAYER_COLBOX_RIGHT):
269

=== PAGE 276 ===
s16 blocked_coord = (xtile_right << 4) - PLAYER_COLBOX_RIGHT;
player_x = FIX32(blocked_coord);
Verticalmovement(upanddown)repeatsthesamestructure,usingthetoporbottomcorner
coordinates as appropriate.
Horizontalmovementisdeliberatelyresolvedbeforeverticalmovement: sinceboth
axessharesomeofthesametilecoordinates,resolvingthehorizontalcollisionfirst
simplifies the code needed later for more advanced collision types, such as slopes.
Thisisareasonabledesigndecisionforthiscase,notamandatoryenginerule: with
other collision schemes, the reverse order might be preferable, or even resolving
both axes together.
13. The “wall jump” problem and its fix
With all four movement directions now working individually, a problem shows up when com-
biningtwodirectionsatonce: holdingdown,forexample,rightandupatthesametimenear
awallmakesthecharactermomentarilygetstuckagainstit,insteadofslidingsmoothly. This
happensbecause,whenthehorizontalaxisisresolvedfirst,thecorrectedpositionleavesthe
character flush against the edge of the solid tile (zero distance), and that exact same coinci-
dence can cause the vertical axis calculation, right afterward, to interpret that position as a
collision all over again.
The fix is to subtract a fraction of a pixel (0.1) from the character’s coordinate immediately
after resolving the horizontal collision — just enough to nudge it slightly away from the wall
without the human eye noticing the difference, but enough that the vertical axis no longer
gets stuck against it:
if (level_col[idx_topleft] == SOLID_TILE || level_col[idx_bottomleft] ==
↪ SOLID_TILE)
{
s16 blocked_coord = (xtile_left << 4) + 16 - PLAYER_COLBOX_LEFT;
player_x = F32_sub(FIX32(blocked_coord), FIX32(0.1));
}
The same adjustment, subtracting 0.1 from player_y after vertical collision, fixes the equiva-
lent problem when combining downward movement with horizontal movement.
14. The final result
Withallfourmovementdirectionsandboth“walljump”fixesinplace,thecharactercanmove
around the entire scene, consistently colliding with beds, furniture, and walls, including the
narrow gaps between objects mentioned at the start of the chapter.
Aftersubtractingthecollisionboxoffsetintheformula, thecharacterstopsrightattheedge
of the obstacle, with no visible bounce or penetration.
Review exercises
1. Explainthedifferencebetweendeclaringthecollisionarrayasu16orasu8,andwhyit’s
also worth declaring it as const in the specific context of the Mega Drive.
2. Whydoesacharacter’scollisionboxneeditsownoffsetvaluesrelativetothefullsprite,
instead of using player_x and player_y directly?
270

=== PAGE 277 ===
Figure 122: The character stopped exactly against the edge of a piece of furniture
3. Given a tile in column 3 of row 4, and a collision array with a row width of 20, calculate
the corresponding index within the array using the formula presented in this chapter.
4. Explain why, when calculating the leftward bounce-back position, it’s necessary to add
16 (the size of a tile) in addition to multiplying the column by 16, while the rightward
calculation doesn’t need that same step.
5. Describe the “wall jump” problem mentioned in this chapter and the solution applied to
preventit. Whydoestheorderinwhichtheaxesareresolved(horizontalbeforevertical)
affect whether this problem shows up?
271

=== PAGE 278 ===
Chapter 41 — Jump and Gravity
for a 2D Platformer
Chapter40leftuswithacompletelevelcollisionsystemforatop-downgame: acollisionbox
aroundthecharacter,aconstantarraydescribingwhichmaptilesaresolid,andacollision()
function capable of converting pixels into indices of that array to stop movement in all four
directions. This chapter takes that same code as a starting point and adapts it to the genre
thatdefinedalargepartofthe16-bitcatalog: theside-scrollingplatformer. Mostoftheheavy
lifting — converting pixel coordinates to tile coordinates, the array index formula, checking
each corner of the collision box — is already solved; what changes is how that information
getsused. Inatop-downgametheplayerisfreetodecidetomoveupordown;inaplatformer,
gravity constantly pulls the character downward, and the player can only fight it by jumping.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to already have covered:
• Level collision for a top-down 2D game (chapter 40): this chapter directly reuses and
modifies that code, in particular the collision() function and the collision array.
• Buttoncontrolsandevent-basedreadingwithJoyEvent()(chapter32): thejumpbutton
is added following that same pattern.
• The fix16/fix32 types, the FIX32() macro, and the F32_toInt() conversion (chapter 6):
allthephysicsinthischapter—gravity,jumpvelocity,terminalvelocity—areexpressed
using fix32.
1. From top-down to side-scrolling: what changes and what
stays the same
Thetilesetusedasanexampleinthischapter—possiblyrelatedtotheonefromChakan: The
ForeverMan,thoughthere’snowaytoconfirmthisforcertainbeyondthevisualresemblance
— includes common ground tiles, some fully solid platforms (meant for practicing jumping:
they can’t be passed through from the sides, from above, or from below), and a semi-solid
platformtype,commoninthegenre,thatletsthecharacterpassfreelythroughthesidesand
from below but stops them when they fall onto it from above. This chapter focuses on the
groundandthefullysolidplatformsalongwithgravityandjumping;semi-solidplatformsare
left for chapter 43, and adapting this same system to a larger sprite is left for chapter 42.
The tileset used in the chapter, with its ground tiles, solid platforms, and semi-solid platform
grouped together in the original sheet.
Themapanditscollisionarrayarepreparedin16Tileusingthesameprocedurealreadycov-
eredinchapter40: abackgroundlayerandacollisionlayerexportedasanarrayofonesand
272

=== PAGE 279 ===
Figure123: Thetilesetforthischapter, withgroundtiles, solidplatforms, andthesemi-solid
platform
zeros. Since this map is considerably larger than the single-screen room from the previous
chapter, MAP_WIDTH and MAP_HEIGHT need to be updated to the new dimensions in pixels, the
row length of the collision array needs to be recalculated (the new map width divided by 16),
and both the array’s contents and the total element count declared in brackets need to be
replaced. A collision bug that shows up erratically on a new map is almost always caused by
getting one of those two numbers wrong.
2. Removing free vertical movement
The first real change toward a side-scrolling platformer is eliminating the vertical move-
ment that made sense in a top-down game but not in this genre: the boolean variables
player_move_up and player_move_down, along with the lines in handle_input() that acti-
vated them using the D-pad directions, are removed entirely. Horizontal movement stays
unchanged.
The collision calculation against the ground and the ceiling, however, isn’t discarded: much
of that work gets reused later on. The upward collision block is temporarily commented out
(it’spickedbackupinsection6ofthischapter, forceilingcollisionwhenjumping), whilethe
downward collision block gets restructured from the ground up. In the top-down game, that
code only ran if the player pressed the down direction; in a platformer, gravity acts on the
character every single frame, whether or not any button is pressed, so the if that used to
guard it goes away and the ground collision calculation stays permanently active.
3. Gravity as a constant vertical velocity
The heart of this chapter is a new variable, gravity, of type fix32, with an initial test value:
273

=== PAGE 280 ===
fix32 gravity = FIX32(0.8);
Also, since the character now has its own vertical velocity — independent of whether the
player is pressing a key — another fix32 variable is needed:
fix32 player_y_vel = FIX32(0);
This exposes a naming problem: the variable player_vel, inherited from chapter 40, repre-
sented the fixed horizontal speed at which the character moved. To avoid confusing it with
the new vertical velocity, it should be renamed to player_x_vel everywhere it appears.
The gravity logic itself is surprisingly simple: each frame, the value of gravity gets added
to player_y_vel (the falling speed progressively accelerates, frame by frame), and then
player_y_vel gets added to the player_y coordinate itself. Since the vertical axis on the
Mega Drive grows downward (0 at the top, larger values toward the bottom), adding a
positive velocity pulls the character downward:
// Gravity: accumulates onto the vertical velocity every frame
player_y_vel += gravity;
player_y += player_y_vel;
It’sagoodideatoresetplayer_y_veltoFIX32(0)atprogramstart,alongwiththerestofthe
character’s variables, and to adjust the character’s starting position to fit the actual size of
the new map before compiling for the first time. With this change, the character falls from
its starting position until it hits the ground and can move freely side to side, but once on the
ground there’s no way to go back up: just like in real life, jumping is needed to counteract
gravity.
The values 0.8 for gravity and, later on, 12 for jump velocity don’t come from any exact
physicsformulaoranystandardSGDKconvention: they’reareasonable,hand-pickedstarting
point,meanttobetunedexperimentallytomatchthefeelyou’reafter. Ahighergravityvalue
producesasharperfallandashorterjump;aloweroneproducesafloatierjump. Treatthem
as fine-tuning knobs, not constants to memorize.
4. The jump button
Adding the jump requires, first, a new fix32 variable:
fix32 jumping_vel = FIX32(12);
theupwardvelocitygiventothecharacterthemomentthejumpbuttonispressed. Next,but-
tonhandlingneedstobesetupthroughJoyEvent(),followingthesamepatternalreadyseen
in chapter 32: a function prototype, JOY_setEventHandler() inside main(), and the function
itself at the end of the file. Any action button works for this (C, B, or one of the extra buttons
on the 6-button pad); what matters is the logic inside the handler. Pressing the jump button
subtracts jumping_vel from player_y_vel (subtracts, rather than adds, because any upward
movement in this coordinate system requires a negative value):
void handle_joy_event(u16 joy, u16 changed, u16 state)
{
if (changed & state & BUTTON_C)
{
player_y_vel -= jumping_vel;
}
}
274

=== PAGE 281 ===
Withthischangethecharactercannowjumpandclimbbackupoverthemap’sstepsandplat-
forms. A problem shows up right away, though: pressing the button repeatedly and quickly
enough lets the character rise indefinitely, since each press subtracts 12 from the vertical
velocity while gravity only adds 0.8 per frame, and that difference isn’t enough to offset very
rapid presses.
This isn’t necessarily a bug that needs fixing in every case: some games deliberately offer
double or triple jumps, and others use the jump button to control the character’s buoyancy
underwater, pressing it repeatedly to avoid sinking. For this chapter’s example, though, the
goal is to limit the character to a single jump until it touches the ground again.
5. Limiting the jump to a single use
The solution is a new boolean variable, initialized to false:
bool jumping = false;
When the jump button is pressed, in addition to subtracting jumping_vel, this variable gets
settotrue. Thebutton’sconditionisextendedwithan&&torequire,besidesthebuttonbeing
pressed, that the character not already be in the air (!jumping is a common, shorter way of
writing jumping == false):
void handle_joy_event(u16 joy, u16 changed, u16 state)
{
if ((changed & state & BUTTON_C) && !jumping)
{
player_y_vel -= jumping_vel;
jumping = true;
}
}
The only remaining step is setting jumping back to false at the right moment: when the
characteractuallytouchestheground,insidetheexistinglowercollisionblock,alongsidethe
rest of the position and velocity corrections applied there. With this change the character
can only jump once per ground touch, without chaining jumps in mid-air.
6. Re-enabling ceiling collision
With the jump now limited to one use, a problem becomes obvious: since the upper collision
block was left commented out in section 2, the character can jump straight through any plat-
form above instead of bumping its head against it. To re-enable it, it helps to first reorder
the lower collision block, and then reuse the same six lines of calculation (pixel coordinates,
tilecoordinates,arrayindices)alreadyusedfortheground,adaptingthemtothetopcorners
of the collision box. The commented-out block gets uncommented and added right after the
lower collision block, this time as an else if rather than a standalone if, since in any given
framethecharactercanonlybetouchingeitherthegroundortheceiling,neverbothatonce:
if (player_bottomleft_col == SOLID_TILE || player_bottomright_col == SOLID_TILE)
{
// Ground collision: snap the position to the top edge of
// the solid tile, just like in chapter 40, and stop the fall
player_y = FIX32((ytilecoord_bottom << 4) - PLAYER_COLBOX_BOTTOM);
player_y_vel = FIX32(0);
jumping = false;
275

=== PAGE 282 ===
}
else if (player_topleft_col == SOLID_TILE || player_topright_col == SOLID_TILE)
{
// Ceiling collision: snap the position to the bottom edge of
// the solid tile and stop the ascent
player_y = FIX32(((ytilecoord_top + 1) << 4) - PLAYER_COLBOX_TOP);
player_y_vel = FIX32(0);
}
The tile coordinates (ytilecoord_bottom, ytilecoord_top) and the collision box offsets
(PLAYER_COLBOX_BOTTOM,PLAYER_COLBOX_TOP)arethesameonesalreadycalculatedinchapter
40; the only thing that changes is which corners of the box each calculation applies to.
7. A design dilemma: what happens when the character
hits its head
With upper collision working, a curious side effect appears: when the character bumps its
head against a platform mid-jump, instead of falling immediately it seems to stay “stuck” for
amomentagainsttheceilingbeforestartingtofall. Theexplanationissimple: whenjumping,
player_y_vel starts at -12, and gravity only adds 0.8 per frame (-12, -11.2, -10.4, and so on);
as long as that velocity stays negative, the character keeps “trying” to rise every frame, and
theceilingcollisionsimplyblocksitinplaceuntilthevelocityreaches0,atwhichpointgravity
finally starts pulling it back down.
There’s no single correct answer here, and both behaviors show up in real games on the
console. At one extreme, hitting your head doesn’t immediately cut the upward momentum,
whichisallowedtorunitscoursenormally;leveldesignthataccountsforthisbehaviormight,
for example, avoid placing hazards directly beneath a low platform. At the other extreme,
the character falls immediately the moment it hits its head, with no “stuck” moment against
the ceiling at all. Achieving this second behavior is as simple as resetting player_y_vel to
FIX32(0) at the same point where jumping already gets reset to false inside the upper colli-
sion block, exactly as is already done in the lower collision block upon touching the ground,
as shown in the snippet from the previous section. Choosing between one behavior and the
other is a design decision, not a matter of technical correctness.
8. A real danger: when velocity exceeds 16 pixels per frame
Since the collision system works with 16×16 pixel tiles and checks positions only once per
frame (not continuously throughout the movement), any velocity — horizontal or vertical —
that exceeds 16 pixels per frame runs the risk of completely skipping over a single-tile-thick
layerwithoutthecollisioncodeevendetectingit. Raisinggravitytoahighvaluecanletfalling
speed exceed 16 within a few frames and pass straight through a platform without stopping
on it; likewise, a jumping_vel that’s too high can let the character pass through a platform
from below if its upward velocity on the exact frame of impact still exceeds that limit.
With terminal velocity set to a low value, the fall becomes noticeably slow and “floaty” com-
pared to a fall without that limit.
The solution has two parts. The first is simply keeping jumping_vel below 16, which guar-
antees the character never jumps faster than the collision system can detect. The second is
introducing a terminal velocity: an upper limit on player_y_vel, checked every frame right
after gravity is added to it, so that falling speed can never exceed that value no matter how
long the character has been falling:
276

=== PAGE 283 ===
Figure 124: The character falling with terminal velocity set to a low value
fix32 terminal_vel = FIX32(8);
// ... inside the physics loop, every frame:
player_y_vel += gravity;
if (player_y_vel > terminal_vel)
{
player_y_vel = terminal_vel;
}
player_y += player_y_vel;
A very low terminal velocity value (say, 4) produces a visibly slow, almost floaty fall, which
mightsuitaglidingpower-up;mostconventionalgameswouldprobablypreferahighervalue,
such as 8, 10, or 12. Since this example’s horizontal movement stays fixed and below 16
pixels per frame, it’s in no danger of passing through tiles on that axis; but any game with
acceleration-basedhorizontalphysicswouldneedtoapplythesamespeed-limitingprecaution
on that axis too.
There’s still an edge case that the system built in this chapter doesn’t fully resolve: because
of the exact order in which jumping and the character’s position get updated (between the
moment it leaves the ground and the first collision frame already in the air), it would still be
possible to jump again without having touched the ground. If the game requires it, the most
direct way to close that gap is an additional flag (for example, already_jumped) that gets set
to true at the very instant of the jump and is only explicitly cleared upon confirming ground
contact on the following frame, rather than relying solely on jumping.
277

=== PAGE 284 ===
Review exercises
1. Explain,intermsofthegravityandplayer_y_velvariables,whythecharacter’sfalling
speed increases progressively instead of staying constant.
2. Whydoespressingthejumpbuttonsubtractavaluefromplayer_y_velinsteadofadding
to it?
3. Describe the mechanism (the boolean variable and the two points in the code where its
value changes) that prevents the character from jumping more than once without first
touchingtheground,andproposehowtoreinforceitwithanadditionalflagtoclosethe
edge case noted at the end of the chapter.
4. Explain the difference between letting the upward momentum run its course normally
when hitting a ceiling, and making the character fall immediately at that same instant.
Which line of code makes the difference between one behavior and the other?
5. Why can no character velocity — jumping, falling, or horizontal movement — exceed 16
pixelsperframeinthiscollisionsystem,andwhatmechanismwasintroducedspecifically
to guarantee that limit during the fall?
278

=== PAGE 285 ===
Chapter 42 — Level Collision for
Larger Sprites
Extending a two-point-per-side system to several interme-
diate checkpoints
Chapter 41 left us with a fully working system for gravity, jumping, and level collision, but
it was tested on a relatively small, compact sprite. 16-bit games, however, often feature
protagonists that are considerably larger, and that exposes a problem that had until now
stayedhidden: thecollisionsystemyou’vebeenusingonlycheckstwopointsperside,thetop
cornerandthebottomcornerofeachedgeofthecollisionbox. Withasmallsprite,thosetwo
pointsareenoughtocoverthecharacter’sentireheight. Withamuchtallersprite,though,a
sizable gap is left between those two corners, through which the character can pass straight
through the scenery without the game noticing.
This chapter replaces the protagonist with a considerably larger sprite (judging by the name
ofthesourcefile,itappearstobelongonceagaintoChakan: TheForeverMan,thoughthere’s
no way to confirm that from an independent source) and shows how to extend the collision
system by adding intermediate checkpoints until the character’s entire body is covered.
Thenewprotagonistsprite,considerablytallerthantheoneusedinchapter41,showninthe
graphics editor next to its tile grid.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, you should already have worked through:
• Chapter 41, “Jumping and Gravity for a 2D Platformer”: this chapter directly reuses
andextendsthatsamecode(gravity,player_y_vel,jumpingwithjumping_vel,terminal
velocity).
• The formula for converting pixel coordinates to tile coordinates (the >> 4 bit shift) and
the array index formula (row × row_length + column), covered in chapter 40, “Level
Collision for a Top-Down 2D Game.”
• Theconceptofterminalvelocityintroducedinchapter41,sinceitcomesupagaintoward
the end of this chapter.
1. Importing the new sprite and adjusting its tile size
The first step is to import the new sprite file into the res folder and, in resources.res, re-
place the reference to the old sprite with this new file. Since the new sprite has different
pixel dimensions, its size in tiles changes too: SGDK always works with 8×8 pixel tiles when
importing graphics, even though level collision uses 16×16 tiles, so the two numbers that
279

=== PAGE 286 ===
Figure 125: The new protagonist sprite
follow the file name on the SPRITE line in resources.res must indicate how many 8×8 tiles
make up the width and height of the full sprite. For this particular sprite, that comes out to
6 tiles wide by 8 tiles tall:
SPRITE player_sprite "chakan_sprite.png" 6 8 FAST
It’saneasydetailtooverlook,becausegettingitwrongproducesnocompileerror: thesprite
simply gets clipped or tiled incorrectly when it’s drawn.
2. Adjusting PLAYER_WIDTH and PLAYER_HEIGHT in
main.c
With the resource already updated, main.c needs the PLAYER_WIDTH and PLAYER_HEIGHT con-
stants corrected to reflect the new sprite’s actual dimensions, this time measured in pixels
(not in 8×8 tiles as in resources.res):
#define PLAYER_WIDTH 48 // 6 tiles of 8 px
#define PLAYER_HEIGHT 64 // 8 tiles of 8 px
These two constants aren’t directly involved in the collision calculations, but they are used
elsewhere in the code, such as when positioning the sprite on screen, so it’s worth getting
them right from the start even if their effect isn’t immediately visible.
280

=== PAGE 287 ===
3. Redrawing the collision box: new offsets and a higher
jump
The next step, just as in chapter 40, is to go back into the graphics editor and manually
draw, on top of the sprite, the rectangle considered to be the character’s actual collision
box. It’s usually somewhat narrower than the full sprite, since the hat, the sword, or other
decorative details shouldn’t block the character against the scenery. Exactly where to draw
thatrectangleisadesigndecision,notamathematicalcalculation: itdependsonthespecific
look of each sprite, and there’s no general formula for deriving it.
From that rectangle, the four constants PLAYER_COLBOX_LEFT, PLAYER_COLBOX_RIGHT,
PLAYER_COLBOX_TOP, and PLAYER_COLBOX_BOTTOM are measured, always as pixel offsets
measured from the top-left corner of the full sprite (the reference point the Mega Drive uses
to position any sprite on screen). For this sprite, for example:
#define PLAYER_COLBOX_LEFT 16
#define PLAYER_COLBOX_RIGHT 32
#define PLAYER_COLBOX_TOP 6
#define PLAYER_COLBOX_BOTTOM 60
Sincethischaracterisconsiderablytallerthantheonefromchapter41,it’salsoworthtaking
this opportunity to increase the jump speed: jumping_vel goes from 12 to 14, giving the
character enough momentum to clear the new sprite’s extra height. Like the collision box
offsets, this value is an empirical adjustment based on the look of this particular sprite, not
the result of a general formula.
fix32 jumping_vel = FIX32(14);
4. First results: jumping works, but the character passes
through platforms from the sides
Compiling at this point, the result is partially encouraging: the character can jump and fall
normally, and collision against the ground and against the ceiling, that is, the top and bot-
tom corners of the box, works correctly. The problem shows up when moving sideways: the
characterpassesstraightthroughsolidplatformsfromtheside,bothleftandright,asifthey
weren’t there.
The cause is easy to spot by looking at the code inherited from chapter 40: for each side of
the collision box, the system only checks two points, the top corner and the bottom corner of
that side. With the compact sprite from chapter 41, those two points were enough, because
the entire height of the collision box fit within a single 16-pixel collision tile. With this much
taller sprite, the collision box spans several tiles in height, and there’s a considerable gap
betweenthetopcornerandthebottomcornerthatneitherpointmanagestocheck: ifasolid
platform happens to sit at exactly that intermediate height, the character can pass through
it without the game detecting it.
Jumping and vertical collision already work, but the character still passes through platforms
when moving sideways.
5. A first intermediate point: one alone isn’t enough
The conceptual solution is to add extra checkpoints between the top and bottom corners of
each side. Conveniently, the tile coordinate of the top corner has already been calculated, so
281

=== PAGE 288 ===
Figure126: Thecharacterstandingononeplatformwhilepassingthroughanothersideways
the coordinates of the intermediate tiles are obtained simply by adding 1, 2, 3 (and so on, as
needed) to that same coordinate, rather than repeating the whole calculation from scratch.
For the right side, a first attempt adds a single intermediate point, two tiles below the top
point:
s16 ytilecoord_right_mid1 = ytilecoord_top + 2;
Testing it, it doesn’t work well: that point lands roughly at the character’s waist height, too
low to block the chest or shoulders against a platform. Adjusting the offset from +2 to +1
tiles,thepointendsupjustbelowthehat,andthat’senoughtoproperlyblocktheupperpart
of the body:
s16 ytilecoord_right_mid1 = ytilecoord_top + 1;
6. Completing coverage for the right side
Evenwiththatadjustment,theproblemisn’tfullysolved: althoughtheupperbodynolonger
passes through the platform, the lower half of the character can still slip through it while
jumping,sincethere’sstillastretchofthebodywithoutanynearbycheckpoint. Thesolution
is to add two more intermediate points, at +2 and +3 tiles below the top point, completing a
total of five checkpoints for the right side: top, three intermediate points, and bottom.
s16 ytilecoord_right_mid1 = ytilecoord_top + 1;
s16 ytilecoord_right_mid2 = ytilecoord_top + 2;
s16 ytilecoord_right_mid3 = ytilecoord_top + 3;
Eachoftheseintermediatepointsneeds,inadditiontoitsowntilecoordinate,itscorrespond-
ing array index and its own collision type lookup: exactly the same pattern already used for
282

=== PAGE 289 ===
the corners in chapter 40, simply repeated several times.
u16 array_index_topright_colbox = (ytilecoord_top *
↪ length_of_levelcol_array) + xtilecoord_right;
u16 array_index_rightmid1_colbox = (ytilecoord_right_mid1 *
↪ length_of_levelcol_array) + xtilecoord_right;
u16 array_index_rightmid2_colbox = (ytilecoord_right_mid2 *
↪ length_of_levelcol_array) + xtilecoord_right;
u16 array_index_rightmid3_colbox = (ytilecoord_right_mid3 *
↪ length_of_levelcol_array) + xtilecoord_right;
u16 array_index_bottomright_colbox = (ytilecoord_bottom *
↪ length_of_levelcol_array) + xtilecoord_right;
u8 collision_topright = level_col[array_index_topright_colbox];
u8 collision_rightmid1 = level_col[array_index_rightmid1_colbox];
u8 collision_rightmid2 = level_col[array_index_rightmid2_colbox];
u8 collision_rightmid3 = level_col[array_index_rightmid3_colbox];
u8 collision_bottomright = level_col[array_index_bottomright_colbox];
And it’s also added to the if condition that decides whether the character gets blocked on
that side:
if (collision_topright == SOLID_TILE ||
collision_rightmid1 == SOLID_TILE ||
collision_rightmid2 == SOLID_TILE ||
collision_rightmid3 == SOLID_TILE ||
collision_bottomright == SOLID_TILE)
{
player_x = FIX32((xtilecoord_right << 4) - PLAYER_COLBOX_RIGHT - 1);
}
With all five points in place and tested, the result is conclusive: walking across the entire
map,therearenolongeranygapsthroughwhichthecharactercanslipthroughaplatform’s
right side, no matter what height along the body it’s at.
7. A bug found along the way: mid-air jumping
Before repeating the same work for the left side, it’s worth fixing a bug that has nothing to
do with the sprite’s size, but rather with the jump button condition inherited from chapter
41: ifthecharacterwalksofftheedgeofaplatformandstartsfallingwithouthavingjumped
first,it’sstillpossibletopressthejumpbuttonandgetajumpwhileinmid-air. Thishappens
because the only condition being checked until now was that the jumping variable be false,
and jumping never gets set to true when walking off an edge, only when actually jumping.
The fix is to add an additional condition: the character can only jump if, in addition to not
already being in a jump, their vertical velocity (player_y_vel) is less than or equal to zero,
meaning they aren’t falling:
if (JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1) & BUTTON_C && !jumping && player_y_vel <= 0)
{
player_y_vel -= jumping_vel;
jumping = true;
}
283

=== PAGE 290 ===
8. Repeating the process for the left side
Withtherightsidefinishedandthemid-airjumpbugfixed,thesameworkisrepeatedforthe
left side: three more intermediate checkpoints (at +1, +2, and +3 tiles below the top point),
each with its own coordinate, array index, and collision type lookup, added to the existing
ones at the top-left and bottom-left corners. It’s worth creating entirely new variables for
the left side instead of reusing the ones from the right side, even though many of the height
valuescoincidebetweenbothsides, simplytokeepthecodeclearerandavoidmixingupone
side with the other:
s16 ytilecoord_left_mid1 = ytilecoord_top + 1;
s16 ytilecoord_left_mid2 = ytilecoord_top + 2;
s16 ytilecoord_left_mid3 = ytilecoord_top + 3;
u16 array_index_topleft_colbox = (ytilecoord_top * length_of_levelcol_array)
↪ + xtilecoord_left;
u16 array_index_leftmid1_colbox = (ytilecoord_left_mid1 *
↪ length_of_levelcol_array) + xtilecoord_left;
u16 array_index_leftmid2_colbox = (ytilecoord_left_mid2 *
↪ length_of_levelcol_array) + xtilecoord_left;
u16 array_index_leftmid3_colbox = (ytilecoord_left_mid3 *
↪ length_of_levelcol_array) + xtilecoord_left;
u16 array_index_bottomleft_colbox = (ytilecoord_bottom *
↪ length_of_levelcol_array) + xtilecoord_left;
u8 collision_topleft = level_col[array_index_topleft_colbox];
u8 collision_leftmid1 = level_col[array_index_leftmid1_colbox];
u8 collision_leftmid2 = level_col[array_index_leftmid2_colbox];
u8 collision_leftmid3 = level_col[array_index_leftmid3_colbox];
u8 collision_bottomleft = level_col[array_index_bottomleft_colbox];
Withsomanyconditionspilingup(fivepossiblecheckpointsperside,eachcapableofblocking
movement),theiflinebecomeslongandhardtoreadifwrittenallononeline. It’sperfectly
validtoreformatthatifsothateachconditionjoinedbyan||(“logicalor”)occupiesitsown
line, as long as the opening brace stays at the end and the closing braces line up correctly;
this doesn’t change the code’s behavior at all, but it greatly improves readability:
if (collision_topleft == SOLID_TILE ||
collision_leftmid1 == SOLID_TILE ||
collision_leftmid2 == SOLID_TILE ||
collision_leftmid3 == SOLID_TILE ||
collision_bottomleft == SOLID_TILE)
{
player_x = FIX32(((xtilecoord_left + 1) << 4) - PLAYER_COLBOX_LEFT);
}
Ifyouprefer,youcanstorethethreeintermediateoffsetsinasmallarrayandloopoverthem
instead of declaring each variable separately; the result would be equivalent, though with
five points per side the explicit version is still reasonably readable.
9. Final result: a robustness test
Withbothsidesnowcoveredbyfivecheckpointseach,thecharactercanfreelyroamthetest
map,jumpbetweenplatformsofdifferentheightsandsizes,andcollidewiththesceneryfrom
284

=== PAGE 291 ===
anyanglewithoutgettingstuckorpassingthroughanything. It’snormalforsomeofthemore
demanding jumps in a map originally designed for a smaller character to become difficult to
pull off with such a large sprite; that’s a level design issue, not a flaw in the collision code
itself.
It’s always worth testing this kind of system by having the character move through narrow
spaces, since that’s where detection gaps would most easily show up if any checkpoint were
missing.
Figure 127: The character jumping between platforms of different heights
With the five checkpoints per side now in place, the character jumps between platforms of
different heights without passing through any of them.
10. What if 8×8 collision tiles were used instead of 16×16?
Acommonquestionatthispointiswhynotjustuseafinercollisiongrid,8×8pixelsinsteadof
16×16, since that would eliminate the problem of gaps between checkpoints at the root. It’s
perfectlypossible(you’djustneedtoadaptthepixel-to-tileconversionformulasandallrelated
calculations), but it brings some downsides that explain why 16×16 is the more common
convention.
On one hand, since there would be twice as many tiles both horizontally and vertically, the
systemhastoperformmanymorecollisionchecksperframe,whichrepresentsanextraload
ontheCPU,especiallynoticeableifthere’sasecondplayerorseveralenemiesthatalsoneed
toresolvetheirowncollision. Thematerialdoesn’tquantifythatoverheadwithanyconcrete
figure, so it should be taken as a qualitative warning rather than as a reference number.
There’s also a memory cost that can be calculated precisely: an 8×8 grid doubles both the
widthandheightofthecollisionarrayintiles. Sincetheareaofagridistheproductofitstwo
dimensions, doubling both at the same time quadruples the total number of tiles in the array,
and with it the space that array takes up in ROM: a map that requires, say, 2232 elements
285

=== PAGE 292 ===
with 16×16 tiles would need around 8928 with 8×8 tiles. On large levels, that wasted space
becomes significant.
Andthenthere’stheterminalvelocityintroducedinchapter41: with8×8tiles,thesafespeed
limitperframetoavoidpassingthroughatileundetectediscutinhalf,thatis,to8pixelsper
frame instead of 16. That’s a considerably stricter constraint on how fast any object in the
game can move, and it has to be taken into account for terminal_vel, for jumping_vel, and
for any horizontal speed.
Figure 128: An 8×8 grid overlaid on the sprite
A reference 8×8 pixel grid overlaid on the sprite: the granularity that collision of that size
would imply, much finer than the 16×16 used so far.
Review exercises
1. Explain why a collision system that only checks the top and bottom corners of each side
stops being sufficient when the character’s sprite is much taller than a collision tile.
2. Why are the intermediate checkpoints calculated by adding 1, 2, or 3 to the tile coordi-
nate of the top corner, rather than being calculated independently from the character’s
position?
3. Describe the mid-air jump bug found in this chapter and the additional condition that
fixes it.
4. Namethethreedownsidespointedoutinthischapterregardingtheuseofan8×8pixel
collisiongridinsteadofa16×16one, indicatingwhichofthemisaverifiablemathemat-
ical relationship and which are qualitative statements.
5. If a map has a collision array of 2232 elements with 16×16 tiles, how many elements
would the equivalent array have if 8×8 tiles were used instead, and why is that relation-
ship a factor of four rather than a factor of two?
286

=== PAGE 293 ===
Chapter 43 — Semi-Solid
Platforms
Almost every platformer from the 16-bit era includes a very particular kind of tile: the semi-
solidplatform. Unlikeafullysolidfloororwalltile,thistypeofplatformcanbefreelypassed
through by jumping up through it and moving past its sides, but it stops the character the
moment it falls onto it from above, as if it were solid.
This chapter adds that behavior to the collision system built in the previous chapters of this
part,andalongthewayseveraldesignnuancesandseveralinterestingbugscomeup,typical
of this kind of mechanic.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to already have in place:
• Level collision for larger sprites (chapter 42), since this chapter reuses and directly
extends that same code.
• The distinction between handle_input() (continuous controls, like the D-pad) and
JoyEvent() (single button presses), covered in the chapter on button controls.
• Theconceptofterminalvelocityandgravity-drivenjumping(chapter41),sincethischap-
ter revisits that topic with a new twist.
1. The new semi-solid platform tile in 16Tile
Thefirststepispurelylevel-designwork: anewelementisaddedtothemapin16Tile,specifi-
callymeanttoserveasatestsemi-solidplatform. Inthecollisionlayer,thetilecorresponding
to that column is painted neither black (free) nor red (solid), but in a third color, green, re-
served specifically to represent this new collision type.
Just as with solid tiles, there’s no need to paint the whole column green: most of it is left
passable(black),andonlythetoprow—theedgewherethecharacterismeanttogetcaught
when falling — is painted green.
The collision layer with the third color already added: black for free tiles, red for solid ones,
and now green for the semi-solid platform.
2. Compiling with no code changes
WiththemapandthecollisionarrayalreadyupdatedandimportedintoSGDK,theLEVEL_COL
arraynowcontainsones,zeros,andalsoanewvalue,2,inthepositionscorrespondingtothe
287

=== PAGE 294 ===
Figure 129: Color palette of the collision layer in 16Tile
semi-solid column. However, since there’s still no code in collision() that knows what to
do with the value 2, the result when compiling is that the character passes through the new
columnexactlyasitwouldpassthroughanyfreetile: thedataisalreadyinthearray,butthe
game’s behavior doesn’t take it into account yet.
3. Creating PLATFORM_TILE and reusing the floor colli-
sion block
The first code step is a new constant:
#define SOLID_TILE 1
#define PLATFORM_TILE 2
followingexactlythesamepatternasSOLID_TILE.Withtheconstantdeclared,thefastestway
to get started is to copy the collision block that already exists for when the character’s feet
touch a solid tile, paste it right below, and replace every mention of SOLID_TILE in that copy
with PLATFORM_TILE.
4. The problem: the character gets stuck above the plat-
form when jumping through it
Compilingwiththisfirstcopiedblock,collisiondoesappearonthesemi-solidplatform,butin
an incorrect way: instead of letting the character pass freely upward, the jump gets blocked
as soon as the head touches the bottom edge of the platform, as if it were just another solid
tile.
288

=== PAGE 295 ===
Thereasonissimple: thecopiedcodeblockdoesn’tdistinguishwhichdirectionthecharacter
ismovingrelativetotheplatform,soitstopsthembothwhengoingupandwhengoingdown
alike — exactly the opposite of what’s expected from a semi-solid platform.
5. The conceptual solution: comparing the current posi-
tion with the previous frame’s
One possible solution would be to simply check whether the character’s vertical velocity is
positive or negative, similar to how the mid-air jump bug was solved in chapter 41. However,
checking only the sign of the vertical velocity, instead of comparing against the previous
frame’s position, can end up causing bugs in certain particular circumstances with this type
of platform. That’s why a different approach is preferable: storing, on every frame, the char-
acter’sYpositionfromthepreviousframe,beforegravityandtherestofthatframe’svertical
movement are applied.
By comparing that previous position with the current one, it’s possible to know for certain
whether the character is moving downward (falling) or upward (jumping): since the Mega
Drive’s Y axis grows downward, if the current position is numerically greater than the previ-
ous one, the character is moving downward.
fix32 previous_player_y;
This variable is declared at the beginning of collision() and is updated to the value of
player_y before gravity and the rest of that frame’s vertical movement are applied. With it
declared,thePLATFORM_TILEblock’sconditionisexpanded: besidesrequiringthatthebottom-
leftorbottom-righttilebeofplatformtype,itnowalsorequiresthatplayer_ybegreaterthan
previous_player_y,meaningthecharactermustactuallybefallingonthatframeandnotris-
ing:
if ((tile_left == PLATFORM_TILE || tile_right == PLATFORM_TILE)
&& player_y > previous_player_y)
{
// collision against the semi-solid platform
}
Withthischange,theresultisnowasexpected: thecharactercanjumpandpassthroughthe
semi-solid platform freely upward, and only gets caught on top of it when falling.
6. A design nuance: how far should the character sink
before getting caught?
With the basic mechanic working, a detail comes up that isn’t exactly a bug, but rather a
design decision: as the code stands at this point, as soon as the character’s feet touch any
part of the platform — even its lowest edge — the character is immediately pushed up to the
platform’s surface. For a fairly thick collision tile, like the one in this example, that behavior
canfeelunnatural: it’sprobablybetterforthecharactertoonlygetcaughtiftheirfeetreach
a reasonably close distance to the platform’s top edge, and if they fall much further below
that, they should simply keep falling through it normally.
This is also a good time to reorganize the code: since in a given frame the character can
only be colliding with the floor, with the ceiling, or with a platform (never two at once), the
standalone if block for PLATFORM_TILE becomes another else if in the same chain already
used for SOLID_TILE, saving unnecessary CPU checks.
289

=== PAGE 296 ===
7. Implementing the pixel margin before getting caught
Tobeabletocomparethecharacter’spositionagainsttheplatform’stopedgeinwhole-pixel
units,anadditionalvariableisneededtoconvertplayer_y(oftypefix32)intoaplaininteger,
since blocked_coord — the coordinate of the platform’s top edge, calculated earlier — is an
integer value:
u16 player_y_int = F32_toInt(player_y);
With that variable ready, the whole platform collision block is wrapped inside a new if, so
thatitonlyrunswhenplayer_y_intislessthanblocked_coordplusapixeltolerancemargin,
meaning the character’s feet haven’t yet fallen past that margin relative to the top edge:
else if ((tile_left == PLATFORM_TILE || tile_right == PLATFORM_TILE)
&& player_y > previous_player_y
&& player_y_int < (blocked_coord + 3))
{
// collision against the semi-solid platform
}
With a tolerance margin of a few pixels like this one, the character only gets caught if their
feet land within that distance from the platform’s top edge; if they fall further below that,
theysimplykeepfallingthroughit. Thisvalue—likeothersinthischapter,suchasthetimer
limit that appears later on or the adjustments to jumping_vel — is empirical: it’s best tested
in the actual game and tuned according to the desired feel of the jump, rather than derived
from a fixed formula. A margin that’s too wide (say, 8 pixels) can make the character get
caught sooner than expected; one that’s too narrow may require increasing jumping_vel so
the character can more easily reach that narrow band when jumping from below.
8. A serious bug: passing through platforms at high speed
Playing around with the result a bit more reveals a much more serious bug, directly related
to the terminal velocity introduced in chapter 41. Since the platform now only catches the
characterwithinanarrowpixelmargininsteadofacrossthetile’sfull16pixels,thesafeper-
framespeedmarginbecomesmuchstricter: ifthecharacterfallsfromhighenoughandtheir
vertical velocity on the exact frame of impact exceeds that margin — which happens easily,
sincegravitybuildsupspeedquicklyframebyframe—theirfeetcanlandalreadybelowthe
margin in a single frame, without the collision code ever detecting it. The result is that the
character passes straight through the platform as if it weren’t there.
One possible solution would be to simply lower the terminal velocity below that margin, but
thatoptionisn’trecommended: withsuchalowterminalvelocity,thecharacter’sfallbecomes
noticeably slow and floaty, an undesirable effect for this type of game. Instead, it’s better to
add an exception to the existing condition.
This problem is, in essence, the same kind of “high-speed tunneling” that already came up
whensolvingaxis-by-axislevelcollisioninchapter40: whenaframe’sdisplacementisgreater
than the detection margin, the object can skip clean over the contact zone.
290

=== PAGE 297 ===
9. The exception: letting a character that was already
falling from above fall normally
The exception consists of adding, with an || (logical “or”), a second way to satisfy the con-
dition: if the character’s Y position in the previous frame (previous_player_y) was already
abovetheplatform’stopedge(blocked_coord),thenthecollisionisallowedtohappenanyway,
nomatterhowmanypixelsthecharactersankonthisframe. Thelogicisthatifthecharacter
wasabovetheplatforminthepreviousframe,it’sbecausetheyweregenuinelyfallingontoit
and not passing through it from below, so it’s appropriate to catch them anyway, even if the
falling speed made them skip past the narrow pixel margin in a single frame.
Since previous_player_y is of type fix32 while blocked_coord is a plain integer, they can’t
be compared directly without first converting one of the two. It’s possible to write the
F32_toInt() conversion directly inside the if itself, but it’s better to create a separate vari-
ableforthealready-convertedvalue: writingtheconversioninline,insidethecondition,tends
to produce bugs that are hard to track down later.
u16 previous_player_y_int = F32_toInt(previous_player_y);
10. Replacing the magic number with a descriptively
named variable
Asafinaltouchtothispart,thepixelmarginusedsofarasaloosenumberinthecodebecomes
a variable with a long but descriptive name, so that anyone reading the code months later
immediately understands what that value represents without having to infer it from context:
u16 how_far_below_platform_before_pushup = 3;
Ingeneral,it’sgoodpracticetoavoidso-called“magicnumbers”scatteredthroughthecode,
for exactly this reason. With the variable now declared, the full condition reads as follows:
else if ((tile_left == PLATFORM_TILE || tile_right == PLATFORM_TILE)
&& player_y > previous_player_y
&& (player_y_int < (blocked_coord + how_far_below_platform_before_pushup)
|| previous_player_y_int < blocked_coord))
{
// collision against the semi-solid platform
}
Aswiththerestofthischapter’sempiricalvalues,thenumberchosenforhow_far_below_platform_before_pushup
should be tuned by testing the running game, rather than treated as final from the start.
11. Passing through the platform at will: holding down
and jumping
Asalastfunctionaladdition,it’scommoningameswithsemi-solidplatformstolettheplayer
holddowntheD-pad’sdowndirectionandpressthejumpbuttontodeliberatelydropthrough
the platform. The implementation combines the two control functions already used in previ-
ous chapters: inside handle_input(), a boolean variable, dpad_down, is created, which stays
true while the player holds down the down direction, following the same pattern already
used for the left and right directions; and inside JoyEvent(), the jump button’s condition is
291

=== PAGE 298 ===
expanded to also check whether dpad_down is active at that moment, and if so, instead of
jumping, it activates a new boolean variable, fall_through_platform.
With fall_through_platform now declared, the condition of the platform’s collision block is
expandedoncemore,alsorequiringthatvariabletobefalse(with!fall_through_platform)
for the collision to take effect. This way, while the player holds down and presses the jump
button, collision against the semi-solid platform is completely disabled, letting the character
fall freely through it.
12. One last bug: getting stuck passing through every plat-
form
Testing this new control immediately reveals a problem: once fall_through_platform be-
comestrue,there’snopointinthecodethateversetsitbacktofalse,sothecharacterends
up passing through absolutely every semi-solid platform on the map forever, instead of just
the one it was standing on when the button was pressed.
The solution is a timer: two new variables, declared alongside the rest of the character’s
physics variables (gravity, jumping_vel, terminal_vel):
bool dpad_down = FALSE;
bool fall_through_platform = FALSE;
u8 fall_through_platform_timer = 0;
u8 max_fall_through_platform_time = 4;
fall_through_platform_timerisacounterthatstartsat0,andmax_fall_through_platform_time
isthelimitvalueitmustcountuptobeforecollisionisreactivated. Thislimitcanbereasoned
out from gravity itself: since falling speed builds up quickly frame by frame (0.8, 1.6, 2.4,
andsoon),thecharacterpassescompletelythroughtheplatformedge’spixelmargininvery
few frames, so a long timer isn’t necessary; a value of 4 frames turns out to be enough in
practice, although — like the other values in this chapter — it’s worth tuning experimentally
based on the game’s actual falling speed.
Inside collision(), while fall_through_platform is true, the counter is incremented
every frame, and as soon as it reaches its maximum value, both the counter and
fall_through_platform itself are reset (the latter to false), reactivating normal collision
against the next platform the character encounters:
if (fall_through_platform)
{
fall_through_platform_timer++;
if (fall_through_platform_timer >= max_fall_through_platform_time)
{
fall_through_platform_timer = 0;
fall_through_platform = FALSE;
}
}
With the timer in place, the final result works as expected: holding down and jumping, the
characterfallsthroughtheplatformbeneaththem,butgetscaughtnormallyagainonthenext
semi-solidplatformitencountersonitswaydown,withoutcarryingthe“fallingthrough”state
any further than necessary.
292

=== PAGE 299 ===
Review exercises
1. Explain why comparing player_y against previous_player_y makes it possible to know
whetherthecharacterisfallingorjumping,andwhythatapproachispreferabletocheck-
ing the sign of player_y_vel directly.
2. Why can adding a pixel tolerance margin before catching the character on the platform
cause collision to fail at high speed, and how does this relate to the terminal velocity
introduced in chapter 41?
3. Describe the exception added to the platform’s collision condition to fix the high-speed
pass-through bug, and explain why a separate previous_player_y_int variable was
needed.
4. Explainthemechanism(variablesandfunctionsinvolved)thatallowspassingthrougha
semi-solid platform by holding down and pressing the jump button.
5. Why was it necessary to add a timer (fall_through_platform_timer) instead of simply
turning fall_through_platform on and off immediately?
This closes Part VII: over the course of these four chapters, an axis-by-axis collision system
was built piece by piece, capable of handling floors, jumping, large sprites, and semi-solid
platforms. Part VIII shifts to a different theme: instead of game physics, the focus moves to
how to move data efficiently within the Mega Drive — DMA, VRAM limits, and performance
— issues that become increasingly relevant as a project grows in size and in the number of
sprites and animated tiles on screen.
293

=== PAGE 300 ===
Chapter 44 — DMA - Direct
Memory Transfers
The VDP’s DMA controller, SGDK’s dma.c/dma.h unit, and the transfer queue as an optimiza-
tion technique
The dma parameter has already shown up several times in earlier chapters without much
attention being paid to it: in PAL_setPalette(PAL0, bg1.palette->data, DMA) and in
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, &bg1, ..., TRUE),whereitwasexplainedinpassingthatDMAstands
for Direct Memory Access and that it’s a copy mechanism that, unlike copying with the CPU,
is cheaper in terms of processor time. That explanation was enough to keep moving forward
with backgrounds and sprites, but it leaves out questions that become unavoidable as soon
as a game grows: why is DMA faster than a CPU copy if, at some point, the same bytes still
have to be moved? Can DMA be controlled more finely than with a simple TRUE/FALSE? What
happens if, in a single frame, more VRAM needs to be updated than DMA can move?
ThischapteropensPartVIIIofthemanual,dedicatedtoVRAMoptimizationandperformance,
andanswersthosequestionsindetail. Thereisn’taflashynewfunctiontolearnfromscratch
here — the underlying mechanism has already been used, unknowingly, since chapter 7 —
but rather a deeper understanding of something that was already being used only halfway,
plus access to an SGDK unit, dma.h, that until now has stayed completely hidden behind the
dma/DMA parameter of other functions.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• An understanding of the VDP, VRAM, CRAM, and VSRAM as presented in chapter 2.
• Some prior experience, even without going deep, using the dma/DMA parameter of func-
tions like PAL_setPalette() or VDP_drawImageEx(), covered in chapter 7.
• A general sense of how SGDK organizes its resources in ROM (chapter 39), since the
examples in this chapter load tilesets generated from an IMAGE resource.
1. What DMA does at the hardware level
The Mega Drive’s CPU, a Motorola 68000, can write data to the VDP’s VRAM, but it can only
do so one word (16 bits) at a time, and each of those writes is one more instruction within
the program: it involves decoding the instruction, calculating the destination address, and
executing the write, all of which consumes 68000 clock cycles. Copying an entire tileset of
several thousand bytes this way, word by word, in a software loop, is a slow operation that
keeps the processor busy the whole time.
294

=== PAGE 301 ===
The VDP solves this with its own DMA controller: a dedicated circuit, separate from the
68000’slogic,capableoftakingcontrolofthesystembusandmovinganentireblockofdata
from memory (the cartridge ROM or the 68000’s working RAM) directly into VRAM, CRAM,
or VSRAM, without the 68000 having to execute one instruction per word transferred. The
programmer simply tells the VDP where to copy from, where to copy to, and how much, and
the VDP itself takes care of the rest.
It’s worth being precise about what this does and doesn’t mean. It’s tempting to imagine
DMAassomethingthathappens“inparallel,”leavingtheCPUfreetokeepcalculatinggame
logic while the data travels to VRAM on its own. That’s not exactly how it works: during a
DMAtransfer,theDMAcontrollertakesthesystembusforitself,andthe68000iseffectively
halted — unable to access memory or keep executing — until the transfer finishes. The gain
from DMA isn’t that the CPU“does something else in the meantime,” but rather two distinct,
more concrete gains:
• ThedatamovementitselfismuchfasterthantheequivalentloopwritteninCorassembly,
because it’s done by a circuit dedicated to that single task, without the cost of decoding
instructions.
• That pause time can be deliberately placed at a moment when the CPU had nothing
better to do: the vertical blank period (vblank), the instant between when the VDP fin-
ishes drawing one frame and starts the next, during which there’s nothing on screen to
update, and much of the time games are already waiting for that moment anyway with
SYS_doVBlankProcess().
It’spreciselythatsecondpointthatexplainswhy,inchapter7,itwassaidthatDMA“doesn’t
take up CPU time”: in practice, when the transfer is triggered during vblank, it isn’t taking
useful time away from any game calculation, because that time was already earmarked for
waiting. The nuance this chapter adds is that this claim depends on when the transfer hap-
pens, and it isn’t free if DMA is triggered in the middle of game logic, during active screen
drawing.
2. Beyond the boolean: TransferMethod
Thefunctionsseensofar,likeVDP_drawImageEx(),exposeDMAinthesimplestpossibleway: a
bool dmaparameterthat’seitherTRUE(useDMA)orFALSE(copywiththeCPU).Buttheactual
mechanism behind it, which other SGDK functions expose directly, is a richer enumerated
type:
typedef enum
{
CPU = 0,
DMA = 1,
DMA_QUEUE = 2,
DMA_QUEUE_COPY = 3
} TransferMethod;
PAL_setPalette(),infact,wasalreadyreceivingthistypebackinchapter7(PAL_setPalette(PAL0,
bg1.palette->data, DMA)), although at that point only two of its four possible values were
used:
• CPU — copies the data with the CPU itself, word by word. It’s the slowest option, but
it doesn’t require the source data to remain intact after the call: the copy is already
finished by the time the function returns.
• DMA — triggers a DMA transfer immediately, in a blocking way: the function doesn’t
return until the VDP has finished moving the data. This is the option used so far in this
295

=== PAGE 302 ===
manual.
• DMA_QUEUE — instead of transferring right away, queues the operation to run automati-
cally during the next vblank.
• DMA_QUEUE_COPY—avariantofthepreviousonemeantfordatathatisn’tstableinmemory
(for example, a temporary buffer or a local variable): before queuing, it copies the data
into an internal area reserved by SGDK, so that the original content can be modified or
discardedimmediatelyafterthecallwithoutaffectingtheactualtransfer,whichwillonly
happen at the next vblank.
These last two values are the gateway to the real subject of this chapter: the DMA queue.
3. The dma.h unit and its low-level functions
Everythingabove—thebool dmaofVDP_drawImageEx(),theTransferMethodofPAL_setPalette()
— is, underneath, a convenience layer over an SGDK unit dedicated specifically to DMA:
dma.h. This unit exposes functions to trigger transfers explicitly, without going through
a higher-level drawing function, which is useful when you need to move data that isn’t
necessarily a whole image (for example, updating just part of a tileset, or writing data
generated at runtime).
The most direct function is DMA_doDma(), which triggers an immediate, blocking transfer —
the explicit equivalent of using DMA as the TransferMethod:
void DMA_doDma(u8 location, void *from, u16 to, u16 len, s16 step);
• location — the destination of the transfer within the VDP: DMA_VRAM, DMA_CRAM, or
DMA_VSRAM.
• from — a pointer to the source data (in ROM or in the 68000’s RAM).
• to — the destination address within VRAM, CRAM, or VSRAM, depending on location.
• len — the amount of data to transfer, measured in 16-bit words (not bytes).
• step—howmuchthedestinationaddressadvancesaftereachwordwritten;foranormal,
contiguous copy the usual value is 2.
There’s also DMA_transfer(), which adds a TransferMethod parameter at the front and del-
egates to CPU, DMA, DMA_QUEUE, or DMA_QUEUE_COPY as appropriate, acting as the single entry
point used internally by functions like PAL_setPalette():
bool DMA_transfer(TransferMethod tm, u8 location, void *from, u16 to, u16 len, u16
↪ step);
To upload, for example, the tileset from an IMAGE resource to VRAM without going through
VDP_drawImageEx(), the explicit call would be:
u16 ind = TILE_USERINDEX;
// Immediate, blocking transfer of level1's tiles
// into VRAM, starting at tile index 'ind'.
DMA_doDma(DMA_VRAM, level1.tileset->tiles, ind * 32,
level1.tileset->numTile * 16, 2);
The calculation ind * 32 converts a tile index into a byte address in VRAM (each tile takes
up 32 bytes), and numTile * 16 converts the tile count into the number of 16-bit words that
need to be transferred (32 bytes per tile equal 16 words). These are the same calculations
VDP_drawImageEx() performs internally when called with dma = TRUE; the difference is that
here they’re visible and under the programmer’s direct control.
296

=== PAGE 303 ===
4. The DMA queue: queuing instead of forcing
Triggeringanimmediatetransferliketheoneintheprevioussectionhasapracticallimitation:
if a single frame needs to upload several tilesets, several palettes, and maybe also update
VSRAM for a scroll effect, each DMA_doDma() call blocks execution until it finishes, one after
another, with no centralized control over how much total time is being used or over exactly
when each transfer happens within the frame.
SGDKsolvesthiswithaqueuingsystem. Insteadoftriggeringthetransferatthemomentit’s
requested, it gets recorded in an internal list:
bool DMA_queueDma(u8 location, void *from, u16 to, u16 len, u16 step);
The parameters are the same as those of DMA_doDma(), with one fundamental difference:
DMA_queueDma() doesn’t move any data at the moment it’s called. It just stores the operation
(destination,source,length,step)inaninternalqueue. Thatqueueisprocessedautomatically,
as a batch, during the next vblank — the same period during which SYS_doVBlankProcess()
runs — at which point SGDK’s engine triggers, one after another, all the transfers that have
been queued since the previous vblank.
This has an important consequence for the source data: since the actual transfer happens
later, the from pointer passed to DMA_queueDma() needs to keep pointing to valid, unmodified
data until the vblank actually processes it. For a tileset living in ROM this isn’t a problem,
since its content never changes. But if the source is a temporary buffer, a local variable,
or any data the program is going to modify or discard before the next vblank, you need the
variant that copies the data immediately into an internal area reserved by SGDK:
bool DMA_copyAndQueueDma(u8 location, void *from, u16 to, u16 len, u16 step);
DMA_copyAndQueueDma() copies the data pointed to by from into an SGDK-owned buffer at
the moment it’s called (a CPU copy, fast since it’s usually a small block) and queues the
actualtransferfromthatinternalbuffer,notfromtheoriginalfrom. It’sthesameideabehind
DMA_QUEUE_COPY as a TransferMethod, and it’s the option to pick whenever the source data
isn’t a constant resource in ROM.
That internal copy buffer has a limited size, configurable with:
void DMA_setBufferSize(u16 value);
u16 DMA_getBufferSize(void);
void DMA_setBufferSizeToDefault(void);
Andthequeueitself—thenumberofdistinctoperationsitcanhold,notthenumberofbytes
— also has a configurable size:
void DMA_setMaxQueueSize(u16 value);
u16 DMA_getMaxQueueSize(void);
void DMA_setMaxQueueSizeToDefault(void);
Sizing both values is, essentially, a trade-off decision between available RAM and the
amount/sizeoftransfersagameneedstogroupintoasingleframe: agamethatonlyupdates
palettes and the occasional stray tile per frame can get along perfectly well with the default
values; a game that loads entire tilesets at once when changing levels may need a bigger
queue, or may need to resort directly to a copy buffer with more room if much of that data is
assembled at runtime rather than already coming packaged in ROM.
297

=== PAGE 304 ===
5. The real limits of the VDP’s DMA
DMAisn’tmagic: it’sstillsubjecttothelimitationsofrealVDPhardware,andunderstanding
them avoids surprises when deciding how much VRAM to update at once.
The source data can’t be just any memory address. The VDP’s DMA controller can only
read from the cartridge ROM or from the 68000’s working RAM; it can’t, for instance, read
directlyfromtheZ80’sRAM(thesoundprocessor)orfromanyothermemoryregionoutside
that map. On top of that, real Mega Drive hardware has a well-known quirk: a DMA transfer
can’t cross a 128 KB boundary within that source memory without the address “wrapping
around” incorrectly within that same 128 KB block. It’s a real limitation of the chip, not
of SGDK, and SGDK handles it transparently: when a queued or immediate transfer would
cross one of those boundaries, DMA_queueDma() and DMA_doDma() automatically split it into
twoconsecutiveoperations, oneon eachsideof theboundary, withoutthecode callingthese
functions having to worry about detecting it.
The vblank time available for DMA is finite. The VDP can only move a limited amount of
data during a single vblank period — on the order of a few thousand bytes per frame, with a
somewhat higher figure on PAL systems than on NTSC due to a longer vblank — and SGDK
exposes that figure as a configurable limit:
u16 DMA_getMaxTransferSize(void);
void DMA_setMaxTransferSize(u16 value);
void DMA_setMaxTransferSizeToDefault(void);
Whenthesumofallthetransfersqueuedforagivenframeexceedsthatlimit,notallofthem
get processed in the immediate vblank: depending on how the behavior for that overflow
is configured (DMA_getIgnoreOverCapacity() / DMA_setIgnoreOverCapacity()), the excess is
either ignored or left pending. Either way, SGDK’s queue doesn’t automatically spread
the leftover work across the following frames: it’s the game code’s own responsibility
not to queue, all at once, more than a single vblank can process, and to deliberately split a
largeloadacrossseveralframeswhenneeded—forexample,uploadingoneportionofanew
level’s tileset per frame over a handful of frames, instead of all at once.
During active drawing, DMA is even slower still. Outside of vblank, while the VDP is
busy reading VRAM to draw the screen, it can only spare DMA the memory access slots left
over between one video read and the next, which are very few. The practical result is that a
transfer triggered in the middle of active drawing crawls along at a fraction of the speed it
wouldhaveduringvblank,ontopofriskingpausingthe68000atamomentwhenit’sprobably
in the middle of some time-sensitive calculation, such as a frame’s physics. That’s why the
general recommendation — and the reason the DMA queue exists — is to concentrate large
transfersintovblankasmuchaspossible,ratherthanfiringthemoffindividuallyduringgame
logic.
Thought of as a timeline, a video frame is split into an active-drawing period, fairly long,
followed by a vblank period, much shorter but with all of its capacity available for DMA.
Whentheamountofdatatomoveexceedswhatfitsintothatvblank,theleftoverportionisn’t
transferredinthatframe: it’sleftpendingforthenextone,unlessthegamecodeitselftakes
care of splitting it up beforehand.
6. Why queuing is an optimization technique
With the pieces above in place, it’s now possible to answer the question that motivated this
chapter: why queue DMA transfers instead of forcing them all immediately?
The short answer is that queuing moves control over when each transfer happens from the
298

=== PAGE 305 ===
point in the code where what to transfer is decided to a single place, vblank processing,
where SGDK can take the frame’s real capacity limit into account. If a game needs, at the
same instant of game logic, to update a new enemy’s palette, upload an animated tile, and
refresh a row of a scrolling map, forcing three immediate transfers with DMA_doDma() one
after another blocks execution three times in a row, with no guarantee that the whole set
will comfortably fit into the next vblank. Queuing all three with DMA_queueDma() (or with
DMA_QUEUE/DMA_QUEUE_COPY in the higher-level functions that support it) lets the game code
keep running without pauses until vblank, at which point all three are processed together,
respecting the frame’s capacity limit.
This same mechanism becomes even more relevant when the amount of data to move isn’t
small, as happens when loading the entire graphics set for a new level at once: several tile-
sets, several palettes, and potentially several tile maps, all ready for the first frame in which
the level becomes visible. It’s easy for that amount of data to exceed what a single vblank
can process. The DMA queue doesn’t solve that problem automatically — as noted in the
previous section, it doesn’t spread the excess across future frames on its own — but it does
provide the tools (DMA_canQueue() to find out whether an operation fits within the frame’s
remainingbudget,DMA_getQueueSize()/DMA_getQueueTransferSize()toinspecthowmuchis
already queued) on which an explicit strategy of loading in stages across several frames can
be built. That concrete strategy — how to spread out the loading of a new level across sev-
eral frames without it showing up as a noticeable pause — is picked up in detail later in this
manual, in the chapter dedicated to loading graphics for a new level.
Review exercises
1. Explain why saying that DMA “doesn’t take up CPU time” is a simplification, and what
actually makes a DMA transfer more efficient than a copy done with 68000 instructions.
2. What’s the practical difference between DMA_QUEUE and DMA_QUEUE_COPY as Transfer-
Method values? Given a buffer with data computed at runtime that’s going to be over-
writtenassoonasthecurrentfunctionends,whichofthetwoshouldbeused,andwhy?
3. A teammate triggers, in the middle of the main loop (not in vblank), several consecutive
calls to DMA_doDma() to upload the graphics for a new enemy. The game starts showing
stutters right at that moment. Explain why, and what change you would propose.
4. Why doesn’t the existence of the 128 KB limit on DMA source addresses tend to be a
problem for someone programming with SGDK, even though it’s a real limitation of the
Mega Drive’s hardware?
5. A new level needs to upload far more data to VRAM than fits within the capacity of
a single vblank. Explain why simply queuing it all at once with DMA_queueDma() isn’t
enoughtosolvetheproblemonitsown,andwhattoolSGDKprovidestofindout,before
queuing, whether an operation still fits within the current frame’s budget.
299

=== PAGE 306 ===
Chapter 45 — Managing VRAM
Limits
How VRAM is divided between background and sprites, how to spot an allocation conflict,
and how to adjust that split with SPR_initEx()
Chapter 44 showed how DMA moves data into VRAM without stopping the CPU. But before
askinghowapieceofdatagetsintoVRAM,it’sworthaskingsomethingmorebasic: whether
there’s room for it. Chapter 2 already established that VRAM has 64 KB in total, and that, in
theory,thisisenoughfor20488×8-pixeltilesifallofthatmemorywerededicatedexclusively
to storing them. In practice, that theoretical figure is never fully available: part of VRAM is
reserved for the plane name tables, the sprite attribute table (SAT), and other internal data,
and SGDK, on top of that, automatically splits whatever remains between background tiles
and sprite tiles. That automatic split usually goes unnoticed while the graphics are modest,
but as soon as a project starts using backgrounds with many unique tiles (a full illustration
converted to tiles, for example, rather than a level tileset with repeating patterns), it can
becomearealproblem: spritetilesendupbeingwrittenontopofbackgroundtiles,producing
visual corruption.
This chapter explains that automatic split, how to detect when it runs out, how to measure
ahead of time how many unique tiles a graphic needs, and how to take manual control of the
allocation with SPR_initEx().
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• The VRAM, tile, and palette vocabulary introduced in Chapter 2.
• The manual VRAM accounting and use of TILE_USERINDEX covered in Chapter 7, since
thischapterrevisitsthatsameideaof“occupiedspace”butappliedtothesplitbetween
background and sprites.
• Basic use of the sprite engine (SPR_addSprite(), SPR_update(), SPR_init()) introduced
in Chapter 21.
• Basichandlingofapixel-arteditorwithindexedpalettesupport(Chapter8),and,inpar-
ticular, of Aseprite’s tileset tool already introduced in Chapter 19, which in this chapter
is reused only for counting tiles, without revisiting how it works internally.
• An emulator with VDP/VRAM debugging tools, such as the Gens emulator introduced in
Chapter 4.
300

=== PAGE 307 ===
1. A typical scenario: a nearly full background and an over-
lapping sprite
Picture a project that already has a finished background (a full illustration converted to the
Mega Drive palette, not a level tileset with lots of repeating patterns) and that adds a new
element as a sprite: a title-screen logo, a UI icon, a large character. The sprite itself is
declared, loaded, and drawn without any compile errors, and when the ROM runs it appears
correctly on screen. The problem shows up somewhere else: in the part of the background
that was located “furthest along” in the memory occupied by its tiles, fragments of graphics
appearthatdon’tbelongthere,asifsomethinghadbeenwrittenontop. Ifthenewspritehas
an animation, even one as simple as alternating between two frames, the problem becomes
even more visible: the corrupted area of the background changes appearance in step with
the sprite’s animation, because it’s literally the sprite’s tiles that are showing up there.
Thisisn’tacoincidenceorahardwarebug: it’sanexactsymptomofthebackgroundtilesand
the sprite tiles competing for the same VRAM positions.
2. Why it happens: two automatic allocations sharing the
same space
SGDK doesn’t reserve one fixed block of VRAM for the background and another fixed, inde-
pendent block for sprites: it automatically splits the available space between both uses, and
that split has a limit. Background tiles, loaded through IMAGE, TILESET, or MAP resources,
areplacedstartingat TILE_USERINDEX(seeninChapter7)andmovingforward, occupyingas
many positions as the image has unique tiles. The sprite engine, for its part, automatically
reservesitsownblockofVRAMtouploadthetilesofactivespritesinto, andthatblockhasa
default size.
As long as the background uses few tiles, both blocks coexist without any problem: there’s
plenty of room for both. But if the background gets close to the tile limit that the automatic
split assigns to it, the block reserved for sprites starts to overlap with the tail end of the
backgroundtiles, andthespriteengineendsupwritingitsowndatathere, overwritingback-
ground tiles that were already in use. The result is exactly the corruption described in the
previoussection: it’snotthatthebackgroundisphysicallydamaged, butratherthatanother
set of data now occupies that same VRAM address.
3. How much VRAM is available: rough figures, not uni-
versal constants
To be able to reason about this problem without memorizing memory addresses, it helps to
have a reference figure in mind: in a typical configuration, the VRAM available for user tiles
can be thought of as a space of roughly 1,400 tiles in total, of which SGDK automatically
assigns around the first 1,000 to the background and leaves the remaining 400 for sprites,
throughadefaultreservationof 420tilesthatSPR_init()applieswheninitializingthesprite
engine.
It’sworthstressingthatthesenumbersarearoughsimplification,notaguaranteedconstant
ofthehardwareorofSGDK:thetheoreticalmaximumfigureforVRAM,perChapter2,is2048
tiles if all of memory were dedicated exclusively to tiles, but in practice that figure shrinks
becauseofthespacetakenupbytheplanenametables,theSAT,andotherinternaldata,and
the exact split between background and sprites can vary depending on the resolution mode,
how many planes are in use, and other details specific to each project. Take these figures
301

=== PAGE 308 ===
as a practical guide for reasoning about the problem, and for getting a rough sense of how
muchheadroomthereisbeforetheautomaticsplitstartstofail,notasanexactlimitthatwill
always match, tile for tile, in every configuration.
The practical rule worth remembering. A background built from a fully con-
verted image (as opposed to a level tileset with repeating patterns, where many
tiles get reused) tends to use a number of unique tiles very close to the total num-
ber of tiles the image occupies, because almost no 8×8 cell repeats. That type of
graphicis,byfar,theonemostlikelytoapproachtheavailablelimitandtriggerthe
conflict described in the previous section.
4. Counting unique tiles with Aseprite’s tileset tool
Beforetouchingasinglelineofcode,it’sworthmeasuringhowmanyuniquetileseachimage
in the project actually uses. Chapter 19 already introduced, within Aseprite, the editor’s
native tileset tool (available since version 1.3) as a way to paint a level map while taking
advantage of several palettes at once; that same panel, without needing to revisit how it
works internally, serves here for something much simpler: counting how many distinct tiles
are in an image.
When converting an image to a tileset within Aseprite and enabling the 8×8 grid over the
canvas,thetilesetpanelnumberseachuniquetileitdetectsandletsyouvisuallymatcheach
celloftheimagetoitscorrespondingnumber. Inafullyconvertedimage,likethebackground
in the scenario laid out in section 1, the vast majority of tiles turn out to be unique, except
for the occasional coincidence in areas of very flat color (a plain white surface, for example),
whereseveralcellsshareexactlythesametile. Abackgroundofthiskindcanenduparound,
say, 1,000 unique tiles: a figure that, compared with the automatic background reservation
mentionedintheprevioussection,immediatelyexplainswhythere’salmostnoheadroomleft
before the sprite block starts to overlap.
Repeatingthesameprocedureonthesprite’sgraphic(thelogooraddedelement)mightturn
up, for example, a considerably lower figure, somewhere in the low hundreds of unique tiles.
Addedtothebackgroundtiles,thatfiguremightstillfallwithintherough1,400-tiletotallimit,
andyettheconflictstilloccurs,becauseSGDK’sautomaticsplitdoesn’tknowinadvancehow
many tiles the background is actually going to need: it simply applies a fixed reservation of
420tilesforsprites,regardlessofwhetherthebackgroundendsupusing600or1,000. When
the sum of both actual uses exceeds the total available, the excess is what gets written over
the tail of the background.
5. Adjusting the split with SPR_initEx()
The solution isn’t to shrink the background or sacrifice the sprite, but to tell SGDK exactly
howmuchVRAMtoreserveforthespriteengine,insteadofacceptingtheautomaticvalueof
420 tiles. Instead of the usual function:
SPR_init();
you use:
SPR_initEx(300);
SPR_initEx() takes a single parameter, vramSize, indicating how many VRAM tiles to re-
serve for sprites; passing 0 is equivalent to using the default value of 420 tiles, the same one
SPR_init() applies internally. By lowering that number — from 420 to 300, for example —
302

=== PAGE 309 ===
additional space is freed up for background tiles before the area reserved for sprites begins,
and the sprite tiles start being written further along in VRAM, leaving the tail end of the
background tiles untouched.
Only one of the two sprite-engine initialization functions should be used, never both: if the
project already calls SPR_init(), that call is replaced with SPR_initEx() rather than being
added alongside it.
After recompiling with this change, the background from the scenario laid out at the start of
the chapter should now display without visible corruption, with the sprite — animated or not
— occupying an area of VRAM that no longer interferes with the background tiles. Opening
the emulator’s VDP/VRAM viewer again (Chapter 4) lets you confirm this visually: between
the end of the background tiles and the start of the sprite tiles there should now be a gap
of free space, instead of an overlap. Lowering the vramSize value even further — to 200, for
example — pushes the start of the sprite tiles even further along in memory, widening that
gap.
Figure 130: VDP/VRAM viewer after adjusting to SPR_initEx(300)
The emulator’s VDP/VRAM viewer after the change to SPR_initEx(300): between the end of
the background tiles and the start of the sprite tiles there is now a gap of free space, instead
of the previous overlap.
6. How much VRAM to reserve in a real project
SPR_initEx() doesn’t have a single correct value: how much VRAM to reserve for sprites
depends entirely on the project’s needs. A game with very detailed backgrounds, close to
using a full screen as a single illustration with few repeated tiles, will need to reduce the
sprite reservation to leave more room for the background. A game with large sprites, highly
detailed ones, or many distinct animation frames on screen at once — several enemies with
303

=== PAGE 310 ===
elaboratesprites,forexample—willneedtheoppositeapproach: keepingorevenexpanding
the sprite reservation, at the cost of a simpler background or one with more repeated tiles.
Thattension—moreVRAMforthebackgroundmeanslessforthesprites,andviceversa—is,
toalargeextent,unavoidable: there’snocombinationthatmaximizesbothresourcesatonce,
because they share the same physical space. What’s generally worth avoiding is needlessly
exhausting either side: reserving far more VRAM than a sprite actually needs leaves less
roomforthebackgroundwithnorealbenefit,andthesameholdsinreverse. Justaswiththe
number of colors in a palette, the practical recommendation is to measure first — using the
tilesettooldescribedinsection4—howmuchVRAMeachpartoftheprojectactuallyneeds,
and set SPR_initEx() to that real number, leaving just a small margin, rather than reserving
extra “just in case” or thoughtlessly accepting the automatic value of 420.
Review exercises
1. Explain, roughly, how SGDK splits the available VRAM by default between background
data and sprite data, which function and which parameter are responsible for that split,
and why those figures should be taken as rough guidelines rather than a guaranteed
exact limit.
2. Describe how you can check, before writing any code, how many unique tiles a back-
ground image uses, and why a fully converted image tends to use far more unique tiles
than a level tileset with repeating patterns.
3. What visual symptom does a VRAM allocation conflict between background and sprites
produce, and what is its exact cause in terms of shared memory positions?
4. ExplaintheroleofthevramSizeparameterof SPR_initEx(),whichvaluecorrespondsto
the default behavior of SPR_init(), and what happens when it’s reduced.
5. Discuss the trade-off between dedicating more VRAM to the background versus to
sprites,andwhatcriteriashouldguidethedecisionofhowmuchtoreserveinone’sown
project, rather than simply accepting the automatic value or pushing either resource to
its limit.
304

=== PAGE 311 ===
Chapter 46 — The New SGDK 2.x
VRAM Configuration
Chapter45introducedthepracticallimitsofMegaDriveVRAMandhowtomanagethemasa
projectgrows. Thischaptercontinuesalongthesameline,butfromadifferentangle: rather
than reducing how many tiles a graphic occupies — a topic picked up again in Chapter 47
— the goal here is to understand precisely how SGDK organizes the available VRAM, and to
take advantage of a configuration option in the framework itself that lets you reclaim space
which, in earlier versions of SGDK, was reserved but left unused.
Understanding the full anatomy of VRAM and knowing how to read SGDK’s configuration
documentation is useful even in projects with plenty of room to spare: sooner or later, any
game with enough levels, enemies, or effects ends up needing every available tile.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, you should be clear on:
• TheVRAMlimitsoftheMegaDriveandthegeneralstrategiesformanagingthem,from
Chapter 45.
• What TILE_USERINDEX is and why it’s useful to reserve VRAM ranges starting from that
constant, from Chapter 7.
• The general anatomy of VRAM — tiles, planes, sprites — presented in Chapter 2.
• What SPR_init() does, along with its variant SPR_initEx(), explained in Chapter 21.
• A working installation of SGDK 2.11, since this chapter modifies a configuration file
belonging to the framework itself and requires recompiling it before the change takes
effect in any project.
1. VRAM anatomy: what’s there, and in what order
Beforetouchinganyconfiguration,it’sworthwalkingthroughtheentiretyofVRAMusingan
emulator’sVRAMviewer(BlastEmandGensKMod,amongothers,includeone),tilebytile,to
see exactly what information lives in each area. In a typical SGDK project, that walkthrough
reveals a fairly consistent order:
1. Sixteen solid-color tiles at the very start, reserved for SGDK’s internal use.
2. The background and foreground tiles of the current level or screen.
3. The tiles that change constantly: the sprites, both the player’s and those of enemies or
other animated elements.
4. SGDK’sbasictextfont, usedtodisplaynumbersandlettersonscreen(thesamedefault
font that already appeared when drawing the first graphics back in Chapter 2).
305

=== PAGE 312 ===
5. Ablockthatatfirstglancelookslikeasetofcorruptedorvisuallymeaninglesstiles: it’s
actually the scroll table and other internal structures associated with the background
foreground plane (BG_A).
6. Asecondblockthatlooksjustaschaotic,correspondingtothesamekindofinformation
but associated with the background plane (BG_B).
7. The sprite attribute table, the structure SGDK uses internally to keep track of every
active sprite at a given moment.
Figure 131: VRAM viewer showing the 16 internal-use tiles, the background and sprite tiles,
and the text font
BlastEm’sVRAMviewer,withthe16internal-usetilesatthestart,followedbythebackground
and sprite tiles and, further along, the text font.
Don’t mistake the “corrupted”-looking blocks for an actual error. The scroll ta-
ble and the sprite attribute table aren’t meant to represent visible graphics: they
store control data that the Mega Drive’s VDP constantly reads during rendering.
WhenviewedthroughaVRAMviewerthatinterpretsthemasiftheywereordinary
graphic tiles, it’s expected that they’ll look like visual noise with no recognizable
pattern.
2. config.h: a file for reconfiguring SGDK
InsidetheincfolderoftheSGDKinstallation—thesamefolderthatheaderfilesusedearlier
in this manual, like genesis.h, come from — you’ll find config.h, designed specifically to let
you enable or disable certain SGDK features before compiling it.
Among the options config.h offers that this chapter doesn’t touch are, for example, one that
keepsthesoundprocessorheldduringDMA(directmemoryaccess)transfers,meanttoavoid
compatibility issues on certain Mega Drive models; the choice of which sprite engine to use
internally, which by default points to the newer and more efficient engine unless the project
306

=== PAGE 313 ===
needs sprite multiplexing (a technique for exceeding the console’s usual 80-hardware-sprite
limit,whichisbeyondthescopeofthischapter); andtheenablingofbankswitching,needed
only for ROMs larger than 4 megabytes.
The option that matters here is LEGACY_FONT_LOCATION, which is enabled by default (with a
value of 1). With that default value, SGDK places the text font in VRAM exactly where it
appeared during the walkthrough in the previous section: after the sprites. Disabling this
option — changing its value from 1 to 0 — moves the font to the start of VRAM, immediately
after SGDK’s 16 internal-use tiles, and frees up the space it used to occupy.
// config.h, inside the inc/ folder of the SGDK installation
#define LEGACY_FONT_LOCATION 0
3. Applying the change: recompiling SGDK
No change to config.h takes effect until SGDK itself is recompiled, since this is a compile-
time option of the framework, not of the game project. After saving config.h with
LEGACY_FONT_LOCATION set to 0, the build_lib.bat file — located in the root folder of the
SGDK installation — handles that recompilation: running it opens a console that fully
recompiles SGDK and, when finished, asks you to press any key to close.
WithSGDKrecompiled,allthat’sleftistogobacktoyourownprojectandrecompileittoo,so
it uses the updated version of the framework. Opening the VRAM viewer again, the change
isimmediatelyobvious: thetextfontnolongerappearsafterthesprites,butrightatthevery
start of VRAM.
Figure 132: The text font shifted to the start of VRAM after recompiling SGDK
AfterrecompilingSGDKwithLEGACY_FONT_LOCATIONsetto0, thefontisplacedatthestartof
VRAM, immediately after the 16 internal-use tiles.
307

=== PAGE 314 ===
4. Why it matters: space reserved even when unused
The font changing position within VRAM might seem like a detail with no real practical con-
sequence, but it isn’t. Consider, for example, a level that doesn’t need to display any text
on screen, and where you decide, manually, not to load the font tiles at all. With SGDK’s
oldconfiguration(LEGACY_FONT_LOCATIONsetto1),thatleaveswhatlooks,atfirstglance,like
empty space in VRAM, located right before the background foreground plane’s scroll table.
The intent in not loading the font is usually to make that free space available for additional
sprites. Andforawhile,itdoesseemtowork: asmorespritesaregenerated,theemptyspace
shrinks normally. But at some point, it stops shrinking no matter how many new sprites are
generated; instead, SGDKstartslookingforfreespaceinotherareasofVRAM,reusinggaps
left behind by earlier sprites that are no longer in use.
The reason is that the old configuration reserves that space for the text font unconditionally,
regardless of whether the program ever actually loads a single font tile. That reservation,
invisible to the programmer but very real from SGDK’s point of view, means that neither
the sprite engine nor the background tile loader can ever use that range, no matter how
completely free it appears to be.
5. Recalculating the starting point of available VRAM
With LEGACY_FONT_LOCATION set to 0, that space is finally no longer held captive. To take
advantage of it in your own project’s code, it’s worth revisiting how the starting index of
available VRAM is calculated at the beginning of the routine that loads a level’s graphics.
Until now, that index was usually initialized with the value of TILE_USERINDEX, the SGDK
constantmarkingthefirsttilefreefortheprogrammerafterthetilesreservedbythesystem
(introduced in Chapter 7). Looking at its definition in SGDK’s code, that value is calculated
asthesumofthreeparts: TILE_SYSTEM_INDEX(thepositionwheresystemtilesstart,typically
0), plus TILE_SYSTEM_LENGTH (the length of those system tiles), and FONT_LENGTH (the length
of the font).
In the SGDK 2.11 installation used for this manual, TILE_SYSTEM_LENGTH was 16 and
FONT_LENGTH was 96, but these two numbers should be treated as illustrative, not fixed:
they’re internal SGDK constants and could change in future versions of the framework.
Before relying on a specific numeric value, it’s worth checking it directly in your own
installation, either by letting your editor show the value of TILE_USERINDEX when hovering
over the constant, or by checking its definition in SGDK’s source code.
With those reference values, the example from the previous section wasted 96 whole tiles,
reservedforafontthatthisparticularleveldidn’tevenload. WithLEGACY_FONT_LOCATIONset
to 0, there’s no longer any need to reserve that space before starting to load the level’s own
tiles. SubtractingthatnumberoftilesfromTILE_USERINDEXworksasafirsttest,butitleaves
the code unexpressive and fragile against future SGDK changes. A cleaner alternative is to
use the TILE_FONT_INDEX constant directly as the starting value, since it represents exactly
thepositionwherethefontusedtostartandwhichisnowavailablefortherestoftheproject:
// In the routine that loads the current level's graphics,
// before reserving space for the background and sprites
u16 vram_index = TILE_FONT_INDEX;
The SGDK maintainer recommends not going any further than this and not overwriting the
16 system tiles at the start of VRAM, since doing so can cause problems in certain map-
handling functions. This is an explicit recommendation from the SGDK project itself, so it’s
worth taking seriously in any production-bound code; anyone who still wants to experiment
308

=== PAGE 315 ===
withthatmargincanuseTILE_SYSTEM_INDEXinsteadof TILE_FONT_INDEXasthestartingpoint,
knowingly taking on that risk:
// Riskier: ignores the 16 system tiles.
// When in doubt, prefer TILE_FONT_INDEX.
u16 vram_index = TILE_SYSTEM_INDEX;
6. Verifying the reclaimed space with SPR_initEx()
To concretely confirm that the space previously occupied by the font is now usable by the
sprite engine, it’s worth turning to SPR_initEx(), the variant of SPR_init() presented in
Chapter 21 that takes as a parameter the number of VRAM tiles specifically reserved for the
sprite engine. Passing 0 as the argument — the default value — makes SPR_initEx() behave
exactly like SPR_init(), automatically reserving 420 tiles.
As a test, you can temporarily force a low tile count, chosen deliberately to push the sprite
space until it butts right up against the start of the background foreground plane’s scroll
table:
// Temporary test: forces the sprite engine to use
// only 37 tiles, to visually verify in the VRAM viewer
// that no reserved gap remains.
SPR_initEx(37);
Figure133: BackgroundandspritetilespackedwithnogapsaftertestingwithSPR_initEx(37)
With SPR_initEx(37), the background and sprite tiles end up packed with no gap at all up to
the start of the scroll table.
Upon recompiling and reopening the VRAM viewer, the background and sprite tiles end up
packedwithnogapatalluptothestartofthescrolltable,confirmingthatthespaceformerly
309

=== PAGE 316 ===
reservedforthefontisnowfullyputtouse. Oncetheverificationisdone,it’sworthreverting
to SPR_initEx(0) (or directly to SPR_init()), restoring the default behavior of 420 tiles for
thespriteengine: thelowvalueusedinthetestonlyservestodemonstratethepoint,notasa
finalsetting. Inarealproject,thisparameterisusuallytunedlevelbylevel,dependingonhow
many background tiles each one needs — a topic revisited alongside the other VRAM-saving
techniques later in this part of the manual.
Review exercises
1. List, in order, the different sections that make up the VRAM of a typical SGDK project,
according to the walkthrough done at the start of this chapter.
2. Explain why the blocks corresponding to the scroll table and the sprite attribute table
appear, in a VRAM viewer, as tiles with no apparent visual meaning.
3. What does the value of the TILE_USERINDEX constant represent, and from what three
components is it calculated?
4. Describe the specific problem that a level can run into when it decides not to load the
fonttiles: whydoesn’tthespacethatlooksemptyinVRAMendupusablefornewsprites
under SGDK’s old configuration?
5. What is the difference between using TILE_FONT_INDEX and using TILE_SYSTEM_INDEX as
thestartingvalueoftheavailableVRAMindex,andwhatriskdoestheSGDKmaintainer
point out regarding the second option?
310

=== PAGE 317 ===
Chapter 47 — Reducing Tiles and
Saving VRAM
Uptothispoint,thismanualhasalmostalwaysassumedthatalevel’sgraphicsfitcomfortably
intotheavailableVRAM.Thatassumptionisreasonablewhiledesigningagamefromscratch
for the Mega Drive, because the art creation process itself tends to stay within reasonable
budgets: the artist knows from the start what the platform’s limitations are and draws ac-
cordingly. But sooner or later, anyone tackling a more ambitious project — a port, a demake
of a game designed for more powerful hardware, or simply a game with very detailed back-
grounds — runs into the opposite problem: the graphics already exist, they already look the
waythey’resupposedto,andthenumberofuniquetilestheyneedsimplydoesn’tfitinVRAM.
This chapter deals with what to do in that scenario: how to detect redundant or nearly iden-
ticaltileswithinanalready-finishedtileset, andhowtomergethemtoreclaimspacewithout
sacrificing the visual quality of the final result. Unlike most chapters in this manual, the con-
tent here doesn’t revolve around C code or SGDK functions, but around a technique applied
directly to the artwork itself, supported by tile-editing tools.
Prerequisites
• Understanding what VRAM is and what a unique tile means, covered in chapter 2.
• Familiarity with Aseprite as a tile-based graphics editor, already used in chapters 8 and
19 to create graphics and level maps.
• It’s worth having read chapters 45 and 46, on managing VRAM limits and configuring
VRAM in SGDK 2.x, since this chapter assumes that context and focuses on a comple-
mentary technique: reducing the number of unique tiles at the source, before they ever
take up space on the console.
There’s no need to have any open-source project set up or compiling: the content of this
chapter is independent of whatever C program is being developed and applies to any Mega
Drive project in general.
1. Why it matters: the real limit on unique tiles in VRAM
In theory, the Mega Drive’s 64 kilobytes of VRAM are enough to store up to 2048 unique
tiles, as explained in chapter 2. In practice, however, that theoretical number is never fully
availableforlevelgraphics,becausepartofVRAMisreservedforotherstructuresthesystem
needs,suchasscrolltables(seechapter45fordetailsonhowVRAMisdividedbetweenthose
structures and graphics tiles).
A useful rule of thumb, born out of experience porting games from more powerful hardware
to the Mega Drive, is this: if the combined unique tiles between a level’s background and
311

=== PAGE 318 ===
foreground exceed a thousand, it’s time to start worrying about not having enough room
left for the player’s sprites, enemies, power-ups, and everything else that also consumes
VRAM. The concrete recommendation that follows from that experience is to keep the sum
of background and foreground unique tiles below a thousand, and preferably below eight
hundred, leaving a comfortable margin for everything else a level needs to display on screen
at the same time.
This figure isn’t an exact hardware rule, but a design guideline learned through practical
experience, and it should be treated as such: a useful reference point, not an absolute limit
etched into the console’s silicon.
ThedistinctionbetweenmakinganoriginalgamefortheMegaDriveandportingor
remaking a game originally designed for more powerful hardware is central to this
chapter. Whendesigningfromscratch,thetilebudgettendstoberespectedalmost
as a matter of habit. When remaking a 32-bit game, on the other hand, the goal is
toresembletheoriginalascloselyaspossible,andthatgoalcompetesdirectlywith
theneedtokeepthenumberofuniquetileslow: youdon’talwayshavethefreedom
to simplify the art as much as you’d like. That’s why tile-reduction techniques are
far more relevant in this second scenario.
2. How many tiles professional backgrounds use: some
reference points
Beforedivingintothetechniqueitself,it’sworthgettinganintuitivesenseofhowmanyunique
tilesareneededdependingonthetypeofscene. Afairlyconsistentobservationacrossdiffer-
ent games of the era is that nature is more expensive in tiles than human-made structures:
a natural landscape, with its organic variation of shapes and shadows, resists tile repetition
much more than a brick wall or a regular architectural structure does.
Figure 134: Cave background with rock formations
312

=== PAGE 319 ===
Acavebackgroundwithorganicrockformations: about390uniquetiles,reflectinghowcostly
it is in VRAM to convincingly represent a natural environment.
As an illustrative example (the specific numbers vary a lot from project to project and
shouldn’t be taken as an exact table, just as a sense of scale), a cave background with rock
formations might come in at around 390 unique tiles, a relatively high number that reflects
how expensive it is to convincingly represent a natural environment. A more artificial or
architectural scene — a castle, a corridor, a building façade — on the other hand, tends to
achieve visually rich results with far fewer tiles: a foreground of just 147 tiles alongside a
background of 105, adding up to around 250 in total, or even a foreground of 86 tiles and a
background of 129, both well below the recommended limit of a thousand combined tiles.
The most extreme case of tile economy usually shows up in well-designed repeating pat-
terns: a castle corridor with a wall-and-tower pattern can be achieved with as few as twenty-
one unique tiles in total, despite including trees, different wall heights, and shading on the
stonework. It’s a good reminder of just how much a well-thought-out pattern — with pieces
thatfittogetherandrepeatwithsubtlevariations—candelivervisually,farbeyondwhatthe
actual tile count in VRAM would suggest.
Figure 135: Castle wall with few unique tiles
A section of castle wall that, despite its apparent variety of shapes and shading, uses only 21
unique tiles.
3. Preparing the graphic for analysis
When, despite every design precaution, a background or foreground ends up exceeding the
desired tile budget, it’s worth analyzing the tileset for redundant tiles before cutting visual
content. There are community scripts and tools for Aseprite that can automatically detect
duplicate or nearly identical tiles — including mirrored variants of the same tile — within a
tilemap-typelayer. There’snoneedtouseanyparticulartool: whatmattersisunderstanding
313

=== PAGE 320 ===
the technique, which applies to any equivalent script offering the two functions described
below.
Beforeagraphiccanbeanalyzed,thecorrespondinglayerneedstobeintilemaplayermode
rather than a regular layer of loose pixels. If the layer is still in normal mode, it should be
converted using the context menu option “Convert to Tilemap,” also checking the option to
detect mirrored tiles on the horizontal and vertical axes, an option that will become relevant
later in this chapter.
Figure 136: Layer converted to tilemap in Aseprite
A layer already converted to tilemap mode, ready for the reduction script to operate on it.
Before automated tools existed for this, a simple manual method served as a quick
check: set the tile editing option to “single tile” mode (so that any change applies
to the existing tile instead of creating a new one), add a very eye-catching color
to the palette, and paint that color over a single instance of the tile you want to
analyze. Since every copy of that same tile elsewhere in the graphic changes color
atonce,theresultletsyouseeataglancehowmanytimesthatspecifictilerepeats
within the level. It’s still a useful trick for a quick spot check, even if you have an
automated tool for general analysis.
4. Frequency search: identifying rarely used tiles
Atoolofthiskindusuallyofferstwomainanalysisfunctions: asearchbyusagefrequencyand
a search by visual similarity. The first takes a threshold number indicating how many times
a tile must appear in the graphic to be flagged. With the threshold set to 1, every tile that
appears only once in the entire level is highlighted; with the threshold at 2, tiles that appear
at most twice, and so on.
Thetool’spanel,withitslayerandthresholdfields,anditsthreemainbuttons: FindByCount,
Find Similar, and Apply.
314

=== PAGE 321 ===
Figure 137: Panel of the tile reduction tool
This information should be interpreted with judgment, not simply treated as a list of tiles
to delete. A tile that appears only once isn’t, by itself, a problem: many levels deliberately
includeuniquedetails—atower,astatue,adecorativeplant,aparticularwindow—thatgive
charactertoaspecificareaofthescenery,andremovingthemjustbecausethey’rerarewould
impoverish the level’s visual design. Each flagged case should be reviewed and a conscious
decision made about which ones to leave as they are.
What’sworthlookingforamongrarelyusedtilesarecandidatesforaccidentalmerging: tiles
that, at a glance, are practically identical to another tile used extensively elsewhere in the
level, but which ended up registered as a separate tile due to some small discrepancy —
sometimesjustasinglepixelofdifference—usuallycausedbyanerrorduringtheextraction
(ripping) of existing graphics or by careless manual editing. Faced with a candidate like this,
the manual fix is simple: copy the part of the graphic that repeats correctly elsewhere in the
levelandpasteitovertheareawiththeslightlydifferenttile,unifyingbothversionsintoone.
The region of the graphic with the correct, already-repeated version of the tile is copied, to
be pasted over the area where a slightly different variant appeared by mistake.
5. Similarity search: merging nearly identical tiles
The second function automates exactly this kind of correction. Unlike the frequency search,
herethethresholddoesn’trepresentanumberofoccurrencesbutadegreeofvisualsimilarity
between tiles: the lower the number, the more alike two tiles must be to each other to be
flagged as merge candidates.
Before using this function, it’s always worth turning on the option to create a new layer
with the changes (create diff layer or equivalent), so the original layer stays intact in case a
change needs to be reverted. Always working on a copy is a cheap precaution against the
cost of losing or damaging a level’s original graphic.
315

=== PAGE 322 ===
Figure 138: Manual correction of a tile with an erroneous variant
Running the similarity search highlights pairs of nearly identical tiles, indicating for each
one how many times it appears within the level. To merge them, it’s usually enough to se-
lect the less-used tile of each pair and confirm the replacement: that action replaces all its
occurrences with those of the more-used tile in the pair, without needing to copy and paste
manually as in the previous section.
Thescriptdetectsapairofnearlyidenticaltiles,differingbyjustacoupleofpixels,candidates
to be merged into one.
It’sworthrepeatingthisoperationacrossdifferenttilepairswithinthesamegraphic—nearly
identical diagonal lines, symmetric parts of a decorative element — before applying all the
selected merges at once, generating the new, independent layer with the result.
Toolsofthiskindcangetsomewhatslowwhenanalyzinglargegraphics,withnotice-
able pauses while similarity is calculated across all the tiles in the level. This isn’t
a sign of misuse: it’s simply the cost of comparing a considerable number of tiles
against each other, and it should be treated as a performance limitation inherent
to this kind of analysis, not as a sign that something went wrong.
6. Checking the result: a problem with mirrored tiles
After applying the changes and generating the new layer, the logical first step is to check
how many unique tiles remain, since reducing that number was, after all, the whole point of
the process. In some cases a counterintuitive result can appear: the new layer reports more
uniquetilesthantheoriginal,insteadoffewer,despitehavingmergedseveralnearlyidentical
tiles.
After applying the merge and creating the new layer, the unique tile count counterintuitively
comes out higher than that of the original layer.
316

=== PAGE 323 ===
Figure 139: Pair of nearly identical tiles detected by similarity
Figure 140: Tile count after merging, higher than the original
317

=== PAGE 324 ===
This behavior has been observed in specific cases as an issue related to mirrored tiles: when
a layer uses horizontal or vertical mirror detection, the merging process can momentarily
lose the relationship between a tile and its mirrored versions, counting them as additional
tiles instead of recognizing them as reflections of the same base tile. It’s not clear whether
thisisadocumentedlimitationofsomeparticulartooloraone-offquirkofthegraphicbeing
analyzed;inanycase,it’sworthstayingalerttothispossibilitywhenworkingwithlayersthat
use mirroring.
The fix, when this happens, is simple: convert the new layer back to a normal pixel layer and
then reconvert it to a tilemap, checking the horizontal and vertical mirroring options again.
Thatextrastepallowsthemirroringrelationshipstoberecalculatedcorrectly,andtheunique
tile count then shows the expected reduction.
With the count now corrected, it’s worth doing a visual comparison by toggling the visibility
of the original layer and the new merged layer, to confirm that the differences between the
two are minimal: small shading details or a handful of different pixels in specific areas of
the graphic, differences subtle enough to be imperceptible during normal gameplay and not
significant enough to justify keeping extra tiles in VRAM just to preserve them.
Figure 141: Detail comparison between original and merged layer
The difference between the original version and the merged one boils down, in practice, to a
handful of shading pixels, imperceptible during gameplay.
7. How much you gain and who this technique is for
As an illustrative example of the typical magnitude of savings achievable with this kind of
analysis — not as a guaranteed figure, since it depends entirely on the specific tileset — a
pass of merging nearly identical tiles on an already fairly optimized graphic can recover on
theorderoffiftytoahundredfewertilesoverall. Atfirstglancethatmaynotsoundlikemuch,
but that figure can be exactly the difference between being able to include one more enemy
318

=== PAGE 325 ===
in a level or not, when working close to the practical VRAM limit discussed at the beginning
of the chapter. In projects where the available tile margin is tight, every tile recovered has a
value out of proportion to how modest the number sounds in the abstract.
This technique is especially useful for those porting or remaking an existing game, because
in that scenario the original graphics were created with no consideration whatsoever for the
MegaDrive’stilelimits,andsmallaccidentaldiscrepanciesfromtheextractionoradaptation
process are common. Even so, it retains value even when creating original art from scratch:
it’seasytoendup,withoutrealizingit,withapairofnearlyidenticaltilesthatcouldperfectly
wellbemergedintoone, soit’sworthkeepingthistechniqueinmindasageneralcheck, not
just as a last resort when a level doesn’t fit in VRAM.
Review exercises
1. Explain, in your own words, why a natural landscape tends to require more unique tiles
than an architectural or artificial-looking scene.
2. Why is it worth keeping the sum of background and foreground tiles below a thousand,
rather than getting closer to VRAM’s theoretical limit of 2048 tiles?
3. A tile appears only once in an entire level. Explain why that doesn’t automatically mean
it should be deleted or merged with another tile.
4. Describe the difference between a frequency search and a similarity search when ana-
lyzing a tileset: what does the threshold number represent in each case?
5. Why is it worth always enabling the option to create a new layer (diff layer) before auto-
matically merging tiles, rather than applying the changes directly to the original layer?
319

=== PAGE 326 ===
Chapter 48 — Saving VRAM
Through Manual Sprite Loading
Chapter21showedthemostdirectwaytoputaspriteonscreen: defineit,addittothescene
with SPR_addSprite(), and let the SGDK engine handle everything else, including uploading
the graphic’s tiles to the VDP’s VRAM. That convenience has a cost that isn’t always obvious
until many sprites are needed on screen at the same time, especially when several instances
share exactly the same graphic. This chapter makes that cost concrete and teaches how to
take manual control of VRAM so that repeated instances of the same sprite share a single
copy of their tiles.
The case study is a background decoration element (trees that scroll with parallax between
the background and foreground) within a sample project. The same reasoning applies to any
sprite that repeats many times on screen with the same graphic: clouds, stars, collectible
items, projectiles, and so on. Understanding this technique is also the gateway to a broader
topic: themanual,strategicmanagementofVRAMasaresourcesharedbetweenbackground,
foreground, and sprites, which was already raised in chapters 45 through 47 and continues
to be developed here from another angle.
Prerequisites
• Knowledge of C and prior experience with SGDK: creating a project, compiling, and
running it in an emulator.
• FamiliaritywiththebasiclifecycleofSGDK’sspriteengine: SPR_init(),SPR_addSprite(),
SPR_update(), and the concept of SpriteDefinition as a container for a sprite’s anima-
tion frames (chapters 21 and 23).
• AgeneralunderstandingoftheVDP’sVRAMandwhatatileis(the8x8-pixelgraphiccell,
the minimum unit of VRAM storage), covered in chapter 2, along with manual VRAM
accounting and TILE_USERINDEX from chapter 7. This chapter does not explain those
conceptsfromscratch, butgoesdeeperintohowtheyaremanagedwhentheautomatic
engine is no longer enough.
• An emulator with a VRAM debugger (BlastEm, for example), which lets you view in real
time which tiles are loaded and in what position.
1. The hidden cost of the automatic sprite engine
By default, SGDK’s sprite engine assumes it’s best to stream each sprite’s animations from
ROM to VRAM as they’re needed, frame by frame. This is one of the great advantages of
cartridge-based systems over CD-based ones: ROM is read with the almost instantaneous
latency and bandwidth of the system bus, while a CD-ROM drive of the era was too slow to
feed VRAM on the fly with that same agility.
320

=== PAGE 327 ===
Deep dive: why the CD complicated animation
Consoles like the Mega CD, PlayStation, and Saturn couldn’t rely on nimble tile
streaming because accessing a CD-ROM is much slower and less predictable than
accessingcartridgeROM.Theusualsolutionwastoloadacharacter’sentireanima-
tion sheet into VRAM during the level-loading stage, instead of bringing in frames
on the fly. The best-known side effect of this limitation is the “stutter” suffered by
some fighting games of the era — Mortal Kombat is a frequently cited case — dur-
ingfinalbattles,whenthegameneedstoloadthefullanimationofanewcharacter
entering the scene into VRAM.
On the Mega Drive, however, the fact that animation can be streamed from ROM doesn’t
meanit’salwaysadvisabletodoso. WatchingtheVRAMdebuggerwhilevariouscommercial
games run reveals a pattern:
• In Mortal Kombat (Mega Drive version) there is constant VRAM activity: each char-
acter’s animation tiles are continuously streamed from ROM, being replaced frame by
frame.
• InE-SWAT,theplayer’sanimationisstreamedthesameway,buttheenemies’animations
arefullypreloaded: evenifanenemymovesorattacks,there’snonewactivityinVRAM,
because those tiles were already there from the start.
• In The Revenge of Shinobi something similar happens and is easy to observe: if the
player moves, new tiles enter VRAM and the scroll table shifts; but if the player stands
still and only the enemies move, there is no change whatsoever in VRAM, because the
enemy ninjas’ animations were already preloaded beforehand.
Figure 142: The Revenge of Shinobi alongside the VRAM debugger
TheRevengeofShinobirunninginBlastEmalongsidetheVRAMdebugger: theplayer’stiles
are streamed live as they move, while the enemies’ tiles are already preloaded and don’t
change even as they move or attack.
The most telling case is that of the rings in Sonic the Hedgehog. When many instances of
321

=== PAGE 328 ===
a ring appear on screen at the same time, they don’t each stream their own copy of the
animation: it is preloaded a single time, and every visible instance reuses it. In the VRAM
debugger those tiles appear colored red instead of the yellow they show on screen, because
thedebuggerdoesn’tapplythecolorpaletteinrealtime—itonlyshowstherawpixelpattern
as it’s stored.
Two reasons to prefer preloading over streaming
1. Performance: streaming tiles to VRAM every frame consumes DMA time and
CPUcycles;overusingthistechniquewithmanyspritesatoncecancauseslow-
downs.
2. VRAM savings: when the same graphic is needed for several simultaneous
instances (rings, clouds, background trees), uploading it once and having all
instancespointtothatsamecopyisstrictlymoreefficientthanlettingthesprite
engine upload an independent copy for each instance.
2. The problem in concrete terms: four trees, four copies
Thesampleprojectaddsathirdparallaxlayerbetweenthebackgroundandforegroundusing
tree sprites placed manually into the scene: graphically they are just four trees distributed
with some irregularity so the scrolling looks natural. The problem appears when you look at
VRAM.
Figure 143: Four decorative trees and the VRAM debugger
On the left, the sample program with the four decorative trees over the background. On the
right, the VRAM debugger: four identical strips are visible, corresponding to four copies of
the same tree graphic.
Allfourtreesuseexactlythesamegraphic. However, sinceeachonewasaddedtothescene
withanindependentcalltoSPR_addSprite(),thespriteengineuploadedfouridenticalcopies
ofthosetilestoVRAM,oneperinstance. Thisisexactlythedefaultbehaviordescribedinthe
322

=== PAGE 329 ===
previoussection: eachspritemanagesitsowntileuploadwithoutknowingthatanothersprite
has already loaded the same graphic. The more repeated instances there are on screen, the
more VRAM is wasted this way.
3. Modeling reusable background sprites
Before solving the VRAM problem, it’s worth looking at how the code that manages
these background sprites is organized, since the solution builds directly on that struc-
ture. The design closely follows the one typically used for a game’s enemies: a
header file (background_sprites.h) with the data types, and an implementation file
(background_sprites.c) with the concrete data and functions.
3.1 The data types
Two structures are defined. The first describes each unique background sprite graphic that
exists in the game (a tree, for example, and later on clouds and stars):
struct BGSpriteType {
const SpriteDefinition* image;
Palette palette;
bool highPriority;
};
The image field points to the graphic’s SpriteDefinition. The palette field indicates which
of the VDP’s four color palettes that sprite uses, under the assumption that all instances of a
giventypeshareapalette. ThehighPriorityfielddetermineswhetherthespriteisdrawnin
front of or behind the foreground plane: the trees, clouds, and stars in this chapter use low
priority because they must stay behind the foreground, but the field exists because that isn’t
always the case.
When a background sprite needs high priority
ThehighPriorityfieldisnotsuperfluous: therearelegitimatecaseswhereadeco-
rative element must be drawn in front of everything. The arcade version of Mortal
Kombat, for example, has hanging chains that appear in front of the player in a
particularstagetoreinforcethesenseofdepth. Thesamebackground-spritemech-
anismdescribedinthischaptercanbeusedforthatkindofeffectjustbychanging
this field.
The second structure describes each concrete instance of a background sprite within a level:
struct BGSprite {
u8 status;
u8 type;
fix32 x;
fix32 y;
Sprite* sprite;
};
status indicates whether the instance is active or inactive (unlike enemies, which also have
attack, chase, or recovery states, background sprites for now only need these two possibili-
ties). type identifies, via an enum, which of the unique types in BGSpriteType it corresponds
to. x and y are the position in fixed-point (fix32), and sprite holds the pointer to the actual
instance managed by the SGDK engine once it’s created.
323

=== PAGE 330 ===
3.2 The data: catalog of types and per-level layout
Inbackground_sprites.c, twoconstantarraysaredefined(theyliveinROM).Thefirstisthe
catalog of unique background sprite types that exist in the game:
const struct BGSpriteType bg_sprites_list[TOTAL_NUM_UNIQUE_BG_SPRITES] = {
{&bg_sprite_tree, PAL2, FALSE},
{&bg_sprite_tree, PAL2, FALSE},
{&bg_sprite_tree, PAL2, FALSE},
{&bg_sprite_tree, PAL2, FALSE},
{&bg_sprite_tree, PAL2, FALSE},
};
At this stage of the project, all five planned types (tree, cloud, stars, and two more not yet
defined) point to the same tree graphic as a placeholder; they will be replaced as the final
graphicsforeachonebecomeavailable. Thesecondarrayisthelayoutofbackgroundsprites
for each section of the game that actually has any:
const struct BGSprite
↪ bg_sprites[TOTAL_NUM_LEVELS_WITH_BG_SPRITES][NUM_BG_SPRITES_PER_LEVEL] = {
{
{ACTIVE_BG_SPRITE, CLOUD_BG_SPRITE, FIX32(10), FIX32(10), NULL},
{ACTIVE_BG_SPRITE, CLOUD_BG_SPRITE, FIX32(100), FIX32(100), NULL},
{ACTIVE_BG_SPRITE, CLOUD_BG_SPRITE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL},
{INACTIVE_BG_SPRITE, CLOUD_BG_SPRITE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL},
{INACTIVE_BG_SPRITE, CLOUD_BG_SPRITE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL},
// ...
},
// ...
};
Notetheparallelwithaneventualenemysystem: alistofuniquetypesandatableofper-level
positions,bothinROM.Sincethisdatadoesn’tchangeatruntime,it’sbestkeptasconst: the
compiler places it in ROM instead of reserving space for it in the scarce working RAM.
Also notice that this level’s entries use the type CLOUD_BG_SPRITE, even though the graphic it
currently maps to in bg_sprites_list is the placeholder tree: the level is conceptually cata-
loged as one that will have background clouds, even though the final cloud graphic doesn’t
exist yet. This distinction between “which category it belongs to” and “which graphic it uses
today” is what allows the graphic to be replaced later without touching the per-level layout.
NUM_BG_SPRITES_PER_LEVEL is not the actual number of active sprites
Thisconstantsetsthemaximumsizeoftheper-levelarray(10,intheexample),not
the number of sprites that will actually be active. The remaining entries are filled
with INACTIVE_BG_SPRITE. This slack makes it easier to add new sprites to a level
without having to resize arrays, at the cost of a bit of unused ROM memory.
3.3 From ROM to working RAM
The data above lives in ROM and is read-only. To manipulate the state of background sprites
during gameplay (activating them, moving them, assigning them their Sprite instance), a
working copy in RAM is needed:
struct BGSprite current_bg_sprites[NUM_BG_SPRITES_PER_LEVEL];
which is filled, when each level loads, by the function copyBGSpriteArray():
324

=== PAGE 331 ===
void copyBGSpriteArray() {
for (u8 i = 0; i < NUM_BG_SPRITES_PER_LEVEL; i++) {
current_bg_sprites[i] =
bg_sprites[all_levels[current_game_section].background_sprites][i];
}
}
This function walks through the ROM template corresponding to the current game section
(current_game_section) and copies it into the working array in RAM.
4. Integration with the level loader
Enemies appear, to a greater or lesser extent, in practically any section of the game. Back-
ground sprites are the exception: in a game with hundreds of sections (title screens, menus,
levels), perhaps only a handful have background sprites. Reserving a background-sprite ar-
ray entry for every section, as is done with enemies, would waste ROM in the vast majority
of cases where it isn’t needed.
For that reason, the Level structure (used to describe each game section in the all_levels
array) includes an additional field:
struct Level {
// ...
const u8 background_sprites;
};
This field takes a value from an enum listing the different background-sprite zones in the
game (for example, the zone corresponding to the city or the one for the harbor), with a
special value NO_BG_SPRITES for sections that have none. The function that loads each level,
levelLoader(), checks this field before creating the background sprites:
void levelLoader() {
// ...
createPlayer();
createEnemies();
if (all_levels[current_game_section].background_sprites != NO_BG_SPRITES)
createBGSprites();
current_game_state = RUNNING_LEVEL;
// ...
}
Why this field is optional and the enemies one isn’t
This design asymmetry is not accidental. In a full game with several hundred sec-
tions, only a minority tend to include background sprites, while almost all include
some enemy. A mandatory field for background sprites, analogous to the one for
enemies,wouldmeanreservinganemptybackground_spritesentryinROMforev-
ery section without background sprites — a systematic waste. The sentinel value
NO_BG_SPRITES solvesthe problem at a minimal memory cost (a single byte per sec-
tion) in exchange for an extra check at load time.
The other key element for what follows is the variable u16 vram_ind, declared as extern in
levels.h. It keeps track of the position (the tile index) up to which VRAM is occupied as the
325

=== PAGE 332 ===
various graphic elements of a level are loaded, in order:
• It’sinitializedtoTILE_USERINDEX,thefirstfreeindexafterthetilesreservedbythesystem
(see chapter 7).
• It’s used to load the background image (VDP_drawImageEx) and is then incremented by
the number of tiles that image occupied.
• It’s used to load the foreground tileset (VDP_loadTileSet) and is incremented again.
• From that point on, it’s available so that createBGSprites() (or any other system that
uploads tiles manually) knows from which index it can write without overwriting data
already loaded.
vram_ind is a manual counter: getting it wrong throws everything off
Sincevram_indismanagedbyhand,addingthenumberoftilesusedaftereachload,
an accounting error (forgetting to increment it, or incrementing it by too much or
too little) causes two different elements to end up writing over the same VRAM re-
gion. The symptom is predictable: tiles from one element replacing or mixing with
those of another, producing corrupted graphics. Section 7 of this chapter deliber-
ately shows that error so it’s recognizable if it happens by accident.
5. The naive version: one copy per instance
With the data model already built, the first version of createBGSprites() (the function re-
sponsible for putting a level’s active background sprites on screen) is as straightforward as
possible: copy the level’s template and, for each active entry, ask the sprite engine to add it.
void createBGSprites() {
copyBGSpriteArray();
for (u8 i = 0; i < NUM_BG_SPRITES_PER_LEVEL; i++) {
if (current_bg_sprites[i].status != INACTIVE_BG_SPRITE) {
current_bg_sprites[i].sprite = SPR_addSprite(
bg_sprites_list[current_bg_sprites[i].type].image,
F32_toInt(current_bg_sprites[i].x),
F32_toInt(current_bg_sprites[i].y),
TILE_ATTR(bg_sprites_list[current_bg_sprites[i].type].palette,
bg_sprites_list[current_bg_sprites[i].type].highPriority,
FALSE, FALSE));
}
}
}
This code compiles and works: the four trees appear on screen exactly in the expected po-
sitions. The problem, as already shown in section 2, is that each call to SPR_addSprite()
independently uploads the tiles of bg_sprites_list[...].image to VRAM, with no instance
aware that another has already uploaded exactly the same graphic. Four instances of the
same tree produce four identical copies in VRAM.
6. The solution: load once and share the VRAM index
SGDK offers a mechanism designed exactly for this scenario: manually upload a SpriteDef-
inition’s tiles a single time, then tell each Sprite instance to use that same copy instead
of managing its own. Three pieces work together here: the function SPR_loadAllFrames(),
whichperformsthemanualload,andthemethodsSPR_setAutoTileUpload()andSPR_setVRAMTileIndex(),
326

=== PAGE 333 ===
which reconfigure a Sprite instance so that it no longer manages its own tiles and instead
points to the ones already loaded.
6.1 SPR_loadAllFrames(): uploading the tiles a single time
The function’s signature, according to the SGDK documentation, is:
u16 SPR_loadAllFrames(const SpriteDefinition *sprDef, u16 index, u16
↪ *totalNumTile);
sprDefistheSpriteDefinitionwhosetilesaretobeuploadedtoVRAM;indexistheposition
(thetileindex)wherethey’llbewritten;totalNumTile,ifnotNULL,letsyouretrievehowmany
tiles in total were occupied by all the loaded animation frames. The function also returns a
dynamically allocated index table that reveals the VRAM position of each frame of each ani-
mation;sincethischapterdoesn’tneedtomanipulateanimationsframebyframe,thatreturn
valueandthetotalNumTileparameteraresetasidefornow(passingNULL)andrevisitedlater
in this manual.
This function can take several frames: call it only during loading
The SGDK documentation itself warns about this: SPR_loadAllFrames() can take
quite a while (several game frames) because it uploads via DMA the entirety of the
tiles from every animation in the given SpriteDefinition. For that reason it must
be called during initialization or level loading, never inside the game’s main loop.
In the project’s code, this call is added a single time, before the loop that iterates over the
backgroundsprites: unlikeSPR_addSprite(),thisloadmustnotberepeatedforeachinstance.
void createBGSprites() {
copyBGSpriteArray();
SPR_loadAllFrames(bg_sprites_list[current_bg_sprites[0].type].image,
vram_ind = vram_ind + 10, NULL);
for (u8 i = 0; i < NUM_BG_SPRITES_PER_LEVEL; i++) {
if (current_bg_sprites[i].status != INACTIVE_BG_SPRITE) {
current_bg_sprites[i].sprite = SPR_addSprite(/* ... as before ... */);
SPR_setAutoTileUpload(current_bg_sprites[i].sprite, FALSE);
SPR_setVRAMTileIndex(current_bg_sprites[i].sprite, vram_ind);
}
}
}
Two details of this call deserve explanation. The first is where the graphic to load
comes from: rather than writing the tree graphic’s name literally, the code takes
bg_sprites_list[current_bg_sprites[0].type].image, i.e., the graphic used by the ar-
ray’s first active entry. This keeps the code a bit more flexible than a hardcoded value,
though it only works correctly as long as all the background sprites in a given level share a
single graphic, which is the case in this example.
This technique assumes a single graphic shared per level
Taking the graphic from current_bg_sprites[0] is only correct if, within a given
level, all background sprites use the same SpriteDefinition. If a level needed to
mix, say, trees and clouds with different graphics at the same time, this scheme
327

=== PAGE 334 ===
would need to be extended by calling SPR_loadAllFrames() once for each distinct
graphic present in the level, rather than once for the whole array.
6.2 The spacing margin in vram_ind
Theseconddetailistheadditionof10positionstotheaccumulatedvalueof vram_indbefore
loading the trees. As explained in section 4, vram_ind has already been incrementing since
levelLoader() as the level’s background and foreground are loaded. That 10-tile margin
servesnotechnicalpurpose: it’sadeliberategapsothat,whenlookingattheVRAMdebugger,
aclearblankspaceisvisiblebetweentheendoftheforegroundtilesandthestartofthetree
tiles,makingtheeffecteasiertofollow. Inarealprojectthatmargincanberemovedwithout
any issue, simply leaving SPR_loadAllFrames(..., vram_ind, NULL) right after the previous
loads.
Care should be taken with expressions like vram_ind = vram_ind + 10 used directly as a
function argument: they’re valid in C, but mixing an assignment with a side effect inside an
argument list can be confusing if someone later modifies that line without noticing it’s also
reassigningaglobalvariable. It’spreferabletoputtheassignmentonitsownlinebeforethe
call, as was implicitly done here by explaining the reason for the increment.
6.3 SPR_setAutoTileUpload() and SPR_setVRAMTileIndex(): reconfiguring
each instance
With the tiles already uploaded a single time, each Sprite instance created with
SPR_addSprite() still needs to be told not to manage its own copy of tiles but instead
to use the one already in VRAM. This is achieved with two additional calls, placed inside the
loop, one per active background sprite:
void SPR_setAutoTileUpload(Sprite *sprite, bool value);
Thevalueparametersetto TRUE(thedefaultbehavior)tellsthespriteenginetokeepupload-
ing this sprite’s tiles automatically; set to FALSE, it tells the engine that responsibility now
rests with the programmer. That is exactly what’s needed here: it’s called with FALSE so the
engine stops trying to upload its own tiles for this instance.
The second call, SPR_setVRAMTileIndex(sprite, index), tells the engine which VRAM posi-
tion to look at for that instance’s tiles when drawing it, instead of the position the engine
would have chosen on its own. The value passed to it must be exactly the same index used
earlier in SPR_loadAllFrames():
SPR_setAutoTileUpload(current_bg_sprites[i].sprite, FALSE);
SPR_setVRAMTileIndex(current_bg_sprites[i].sprite, vram_ind);
The two indices must match exactly
If the index used in SPR_setVRAMTileIndex() doesn’t match the one used in
SPR_loadAllFrames(), the instance will end up displaying on screen whatever
tiles happen to be at that other VRAM position, which could belong to any other
elementofthegame,insteadofthecorrectgraphic. It’sasilenterror: theprogram
compiles and runs without failing, but the visual result is wrong.
Why keep using SPR_addSprite() if VRAM is managed by hand?
Itmightseemthat,ifautomatictileuploadingisgoingtobedisabledanyway,there’s
no need to go through SPR_addSprite(). However, that call is still necessary: it’s
what reserves the Sprite instance within the engine, assigns it a hardware slot,
incorporates it into the priority/depth ordering, and makes it available for the rest
328

=== PAGE 335 ===
oftheengine’sfunctions(position,animation,flipping). Theonlythingbeingtaken
over is VRAM management, not the rest of the sprite’s lifecycle (see chapter 21).
6.4 The result
Withthesechanges(onecalltoSPR_loadAllFrames()beforetheloopandtwoadditionalcalls
insideit),theprojectisrecompiledandtheVRAMdebuggerischeckedagain. Onscreenthe
result is visually identical to the one in section 2: the same four trees, in the same positions.
The difference is in VRAM, where there is now a single copy of the tree tiles instead of four.
Figure 144: VRAM debugger after sharing the tree tiles
Same sample program after the change: where there used to be four identical strips of tree
tiles, there is now only one, and the four instances visible on screen share that single copy.
That difference is exactly the space recovered for other elements of the game (more sprites,
larger tilesets, other backgrounds) to use. It’s the same VRAM-optimization logic already
worked on from a different angle in chapter 47 when reducing the number of unique tiles in
a tileset: there, the amount of data to upload was reduced; here, uploading data that was
already there multiple times is avoided.
7. Choosing the right VRAM position
Sharingasinglecopyoftilesacrossseveralinstancessolvesmuchoftheproblem,butitisn’t
the only relevant decision: where, within VRAM, that copy is placed also matters. The VDP’s
VRAM has 2048 tile positions in total; BlastEm’s VRAM debugger represents them as a grid
of 32 rows of 64 tiles each. Not all of those positions are free: part is occupied by the scroll
tableandthespritetable,whosesizedependsonhowlargethelevelisandwhattypeofscroll
is used.
329

=== PAGE 336 ===
Toillustratetheriskofchoosingabadposition,thesampleprojectfirsttriessettingvram_ind
to 264, which places the tree tiles at the start of the second row of the debugger’s grid. The
resultisn’twhat’sexpected: sincethatregionwasalreadyoccupiedbybackgroundtiles,they
getoverwritten,andthebackgroundcloudsappearcorrupted,showingfragmentsofthetree
graphic instead of their original graphic.
In the VRAM debugger that strip of tree tiles appears right where background data used to
be, and on screen the effect is just as direct: the clouds lose their original graphic and show
recognizable fragments of the tree in its place.
A carelessly chosen VRAM index corrupts other graphics
Thisexperimentdeliberatelyreproducestheerrorwarnedaboutinsection4: man-
ually writing tiles to a VRAM position already in use by another element produces
no compilation or runtime error, but it does visually corrupt whatever was stored
there. Before choosing a VRAM index by hand, it’s important to first check, via the
debugger, which range of positions is actually free.
Themoreproductivealternativeistotakeadvantageofthegaps: thetilesleftunusedbetween
the end of the background/foreground data and the start of the scroll table and sprite table,
at the bottom of VRAM. How much free space there is depends on the level’s size and scroll
configuration, but there’s usually some margin. The sample project tries placing the trees at
position 1984 (2048 minus 64, i.e., the start of the grid’s last row) and manages to fit them
into a space that was previously unused, without overwriting any other data.
Figure 145: Tree tiles relocated to the end of VRAM
The tree tiles relocated to position 1984, at the start of the debugger grid’s last row: a gap
that used to sit unused between the sprite table and the scroll table.
Thisstrategyhasadoubleadvantage: notonlyisasinglecopyoftilessharedacrossinstances
(section 6), but that copy is also placed in a space that would otherwise go to waste, leaving
more tiles available both for the background and foreground and for the rest of the sprites
that do use SGDK’s automatic engine. This idea of “fitting” manual data into VRAM’s free
330

=== PAGE 337 ===
gapsisatechniquerevisitedlaterinthismanualforotherinterfaceelements,suchashealth
hearts or sub-weapon icons.
Review exercises
1. Explain in your own words why four sprite instances that share the same graphic can
endupoccupyingfourseparatecopiesinVRAMifthey’recreatedwithSPR_addSprite()
without any further modification.
2. What’sthedifferencebetweentheloadingSPR_addSprite()performsbydefaultandthe
one SPR_loadAllFrames() performs? Mention at least one advantage and one limitation
of using the latter.
3. Suppose that, due to a typo, SPR_setVRAMTileIndex() is called with an index different
from the one used in SPR_loadAllFrames() for the same graphic. Will the program fail
to compile or to run? What visual symptom would you expect?
4. Thecountervram_indisincrementedbyhandaftereachtileloadinlevelLoader(). Pro-
pose an alternative design that reduces the risk of someone forgetting to increment it
correctly when adding a new graphic element to the level.
5. Describe a situation where it would not be advisable to apply this chapter’s technique
(sharing a single copy of tiles across several sprite instances). Justify your answer by
considering what would happen if those instances needed to animate independently.
331

=== PAGE 338 ===
Chapter 49 — Profiling and CPU
Load
How to know, while the game is running, whether a frame’s work fits into the time available
The previous three chapters of this part each dealt, from a different angle, with the same re-
source: videomemory. Chapter44showedhowDMAmovesdataintoVRAMwithoutstalling
theCPU;chapters45and46explainedhowmuchVRAMisactuallyavailableandhowtosplit
it between background and sprites; chapter 47 showed how to reduce the number of unique
tilesagraphicneedsinordertofitintothatspace. Thischapter,thelastinPartVIII,shiftsthe
axis: instead of asking how much memory something takes up, it asks how much CPU time
it consumes. These are two different questions — a game can have plenty of VRAM to spare
andstill run slowly, or it canhave plenty of free CPUtime tospare and still not fitin memory
— but both answer the same underlying need: making the game work within the hardware’s
real limits, not just within the limits that happen to be convenient to program against.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to keep in mind:
• The main loop and the role of SYS_doVBlankProcess() in synchronizing with the VDP,
introduced in chapter 5.
• Emulatorswithdevelopmenttools—GensKMod,BlastEm—andtheirVDPviewersand
68000 debuggers, introduced in chapter 4.
• DMA as a mechanism for moving data to VRAM without blocking the CPU (chapter 44),
and managing VRAM limits (chapters 45 through 47), as a reference for the other half
of optimizing a Mega Drive game.
• Bit shifting as an alternative to multiplication and division, seen when calculating paral-
lax depth for a background in chapter 25.
• Collision arrays traversed frame by frame, introduced in Part VII (chapters 40 through
43).
1. A frame’s budget: what “frame budget” means
A console doesn’t draw a continuous image: it draws a succession of complete frames, one
afteranother,atafixedrateimposedbythevideohardwareitself. OnaMegaDriveconfigured
for NTSC output, that rate is 60 frames per second; on one configured for PAL, it’s 50. That
figure isn’t a performance target to aim for: it’s literally the rate at which the VDP sweeps
the screen, the same regardless of how simple or complex the scene is.
A direct calculation follows from that figure. At 60 frames per second, each frame has 1/60
of a second — about 16.7 milliseconds — to complete. At 50 frames per second, that margin
332

=== PAGE 339 ===
risesto20milliseconds. Thatinterval—theframebudget—isallthetimetheprogramhas
to do absolutely everything a frame needs: read the controls, update the game logic, resolve
physicsandcollisions,decidewhatneedstoberedrawn,andgetallofthatworkreadybefore
the VDP starts drawing the next frame.
Chapter5alreadyintroducedthepieceofcodethatembodiesthatlimit: SYS_doVBlankProcess(),
called once per loop iteration, which synchronizes pending work with the VDP’s vertical
blanking interval — the brief span between one drawn frame and the next during which
it’s safe to modify certain graphics data. That call isn’t a mere formality: it’s, in practice,
the point where each frame’s budget gets settled. If all the work in one iteration of the
main loop — reading input, moving characters, resolving collisions, updating animations —
finishes before the next vblank arrives, SYS_doVBlankProcess() simply waits out whatever
time is left and the game keeps running at 60 (or 50) frames per second without anything
being noticeable. But if that work stretches past the vblank it was supposed to meet,
SYS_doVBlankProcess() ends up waiting for the next vblank, a full frame later: the game
drops an entire frame, the sense of smoothness suffers, and if this happens persistently, the
actual game speed perceived by the player falls below the nominal 60 (or 50) frames per
second.
Dropping a frame is not the same as running “a bit slower.” A game that
occasionallygoesoveritsbudgetdropsisolatedframes,whichgenerallyreadsasa
small, one-off jolt. A game that systematically goes over its budget — for example,
because a poorly written collision routine inherently takes more than 16.7 millisec-
onds in a level with many enemies — ends up running at a constant fraction of its
nominalspeed(30framespersecondinsteadof60,forinstance),andanyanimation
or movement that isn’t designed to be independent of frame rate starts to look and
feel different depending on how many elements are on screen at a given moment.
Within that frame budget there is, moreover, an even narrower margin: the vblank interval
itself,justafractionofthewholeframe,istheonlywindowinwhichit’ssafetowritetoVRAM
withoutriskingcorruptingwhatevertheVDPisdrawingatthatinstant. Thisisexactlywhere
the DMA covered in chapter 44 comes into play: the faster VRAM transfers complete, the
more room is left within that narrow window to queue up graphics updates without having
them cut off halfway through. The frame budget and the vblank window are, in that sense,
two sides of the same timing problem: one bounds how long the game’s complete logic can
take, the other bounds specifically how long writes to VRAM can take.
2. Measuring CPU load: SYS_getCPULoad() and VDP_showCPULoad()
Knowing that a frame budget exists is useful as a concept, but it says nothing about whether
a specific project is respecting it. For that, SGDK offers a way to estimate, frame by frame
and while the game is running, what percentage of that budget is actually being used.
SYS_getCPULoad() returns a value that estimates the CPU load for the most recent frame,
expressed as a percentage: SGDK measures how much time is left idle while waiting for
vblank and compares it against the total time available in that frame, so that a value close to
100% indicates that nearly the entire frame budget is being used, while a value well above
100% indicates that the frame is going over its budget and, consequently, frames are being
dropped.
Checking that number manually, frame by frame, isn’t very practical during normal devel-
opment, so SGDK also offers a way to display it directly on screen: VDP_showCPULoad(),
which draws that percentage as overlaid text, using the same default font already used to
display any other text on screen (chapter 5). As with any on-screen debugging information,
it’s best to call it once per iteration of the main loop, typically right alongside the call to
333

=== PAGE 340 ===
SYS_doVBlankProcess():
while (1)
{
// input reading, game logic,
// sprite and animation updates...
VDP_showCPULoad(1, 1); // <!-- VERIFY: exact parameter names -->
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
With that overlay active, it’s enough to play the project’s most demanding level — the one
withthemostenemiesonscreen,themostelaborateparallaxbackground,theexplosionwith
the most particles — and watch how the number reacts: if it stays stable and comfortably
below 100%, there’s margin to spare; if it starts approaching or exceeding 100% in the most
demandingsituations,it’stimetoinvestigatewhichpartoftheframeisconsumingthatexcess,
before the problem becomes noticeable to the player.
3. Measuring real frames per second: VDP_showFPS()
The CPU load percentage is an internal estimate, calculated from how much idle time is left
beforevblank. Adirectandmoreintuitivecomplementtothatestimateistodirectlymeasure
how many frames per second are actually being drawn in practice: if the nominal target is
60 (NTSC) or 50 (PAL) and the counter shows a consistently lower number, that’s the most
concrete confirmation possible that frames are being dropped, with no need to interpret any
percentage.
SGDKoffersVDP_showFPS()forthispurpose,withthesameusagepatternasVDP_showCPULoad():
it’scalledonceperiterationofthemainloopanddrawstheframes-per-secondcountdirectly
on screen using the default font.
while (1)
{
// game logic...
VDP_showFPS(TRUE); // <!-- VERIFY: exact parameter name and meaning -->
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
In some projects it may be useful to get that number without drawing it directly on screen
— for example, to average it over several frames, log it into a custom variable, or display it
in a format other than the one the default function offers. For that specific case, SGDK also
exposesafunctionthatonlycalculatesthevaluewithoutdrawinganything,alongthelinesof
SYS_getFPS(),althoughit’sworthverifyingitsexactnameandreturntypeagainstone’sown
SGDK 2.11 installation before relying on it in production code.
Usedtogether,theCPUloadpercentageandtheframes-per-secondcounteranswerdifferent,
complementary questions: the first indicates how much margin is left within each frame’s
budget, even when that margin is still enough to sustain the nominal 60 (or 50) frames per
second; the second confirms, unambiguously, whether those nominal frames are actually be-
ing achieved. It’s worth keeping both overlays active during much of development — and
removing them, along with any other on-screen debugging tool, before generating a final
buildofthegame—ratherthanturningthemononlyonceaperformanceproblemisalready
334

=== PAGE 341 ===
suspected: by the time the problem is noticeable just by playing, it has usually been present
for quite a while.
4. Emulators as a complement: visual profiling with
BlastEm and Gens KMod
The CPU load percentage and the frames-per-second counter tell you whether a frame is
goingoverbudget,buttheydon’tautomaticallytellyouwhichpartofthecodeisresponsible.
For that second step, the development tools of the emulators introduced in chapter 4 are a
direct complement.
Both BlastEm and Gens KMod include a 68000 debugger capable of pausing execution, step-
ping instruction by instruction or frame by frame, and placing breakpoints at specific code
addresses. CombiningthatcapabilitywiththeVDP_showCPULoad()overlayitselfmakesitpos-
sibletonarrowdowntheproblemfairlyprecisely: iftheloadpercentagespikesrightwhenan
explosionwithlotsofparticlestriggers,orrightwhenenteringaroomwithacertainnumber
of enemies, pausing execution at that instant and stepping through the debugger lets you
observe exactly which routine is running when the time runs out, instead of having to guess
by reviewing the code blindly.
The VDP viewer in both emulators, already used in chapters 45 and 46 to visually inspect
VRAM, plays a different but related role here: it doesn’t measure CPU time, but it does let
you confirm with certainty how many VRAM transfers are happening in a given frame and
howlargetheyare—ausefulpieceofdatafordecidingwhethertherealbottleneckisonthe
computation side (the CPU resolving logic) or on the data-transfer-to-VRAM side (a problem
revisitedinthenextsection). Noemulatorreproducesrealhardwaretimingswithperfectac-
curacy,sotheperformancefigurestheyproduceshouldbetreatedasasolidguideforfinding
the bottleneck, not as a certified measurement of behavior on physical console hardware.
5. What typically eats into a frame’s budget in practice
With the measurement tools already introduced, it’s worth reviewing the usual suspects in
a real Mega Drive game when the CPU load percentage starts approaching the limit. This
manual has already presented, in earlier chapters, the concrete solution for each of these
three cases; what this chapter adds is the judgment needed to recognize them as the real
cause of a performance problem, rather than treating them as an isolated technical curiosity.
Avoidable multiplications and divisions. The Mega Drive’s Motorola 68000 resolves a
multiplication or a division in considerably more cycles than an addition, a subtraction, or a
bit shift. Chapter 25 already showed the concrete case of dividing a parallax background’s
position to achieve a sense of depth: replacing that division with a bit shift (>>) when the
divisor is a power of two — 2, 4, 8, and so on — achieves exactly the same numeric result
at a fraction of the cost. Any calculation that repeats once per frame, and even more so if
it repeats once per sprite or per active entity on screen, is a natural candidate to review for
multiplications or divisions that could be replaced with a lighter operation.
VRAM transfers without using DMA. Chapter 44 showed that copying data to VRAM by
driving the CPU directly — instead of delegating that copy to the DMA — keeps the CPU
fully occupied for the entire transfer, unable to do any other work in the meantime. A large
transfer done this way, especially if it happens within the narrow vblank window described
in section 1, can by itself consume a considerable portion of that frame’s budget. DMA frees
up the CPU during the transfer and, by completing it faster thanks to hardware dedicated to
that task, leaves more margin available for the rest of that frame’s work.
335

=== PAGE 342 ===
Traversing large collision arrays every frame. Part VII of this manual (chapters 40
through 43) built level collision from an array that represents, tile by tile, which areas of
the map are walkable. Checking that array for the few positions relevant to a character —
the corners of its collision box, nothing more — is a cheap operation; traversing the entire
array, or checking it for far more positions than strictly necessary, once per active entity and
once per frame, is a pattern that scales poorly: the cost grows with the number of enemies
or objects on screen, exactly the kind of growth that can go unnoticed with a handful of test
enemies and only become a real problem once a finished level packs in many at once — the
scenario revisited in Part IX of this manual.
None of these three cases is, by itself, a reason to rewrite code preemptively: optimizing be-
foremeasuringriskscomplicatingcodethatwasn’tactuallyresponsiblefortheproblem. The
correct approach is the reverse of how these three sections are ordered: first measure with
VDP_showCPULoad() and VDP_showFPS(), then confirm with the emulator’s debugger which
specific routine fires exactly when the percentage rises, and only then apply the appropriate
technique — bit shifting, DMA, or narrowing an array traversal — at the actual point of the
problem.
Review exercises
1. CalculatehowmanymillisecondsofbudgetaframehasinNTSC(60framespersecond)
and in PAL (50 frames per second), and explain exactly what happens when a frame’s
logic and drawing exceed that budget.
2. What’sthedifferencebetweenwhatSYS_getCPULoad()/VDP_showCPULoad()measureand
what VDP_showFPS() measures, and why is it worth using both tools together during
development instead of relying on just one?
3. Explainwhyanemulator’sdebuggingtools(chapter4)areagoodcomplementtoSGDK’s
CPUloadoverlay,andnotasubstitute: whatinformationdoeseachprovidethattheother
can’t offer on its own?
4. NamethreetypicaloperationsinaMegaDrivegamethattendtoeatupagoodpartofa
frame’s budget, and for each one indicate the technique already covered in this manual
for mitigating it.
5. A project has plenty of free VRAM space to spare (chapters 45 through 47), but the
VDP_showFPS() counter shows sustained readings below 60 frames per second in NTSC.
ExplainwhyreducingVRAMusageevenfurtherwon’tsolvethisproblem,andwhatsteps
should be taken instead.
336

=== PAGE 343 ===
Chapter 50 — VDP Planes and
Enemies in a Beat ’em Up
Why an enemy placed only once in the code can end up appearing repeated several times
on a large map, and how to avoid it by combining a custom positioning function with
SPR_setVisibility()
Thispartofthemanualtakesonalongerprojectthananyofthepreviousones: overthenext
thirteen chapters, a side-scrolling action game with enemies on screen will be built step by
step, in the style of Streets of Rage: a simple but mechanically complete beat ’em up, which
servesasanexcusetointroducecodeorganizationtopics—headerfiles,structs,enums,func-
tionpointers,gamestates—thathaven’tbeenneededuntilnowinsmallerprojects. Thestart-
ing point is the same world that the previous chapters have been building: a large scrolling
map, a camera that follows the player, and a parallax background behind everything. The
only thing missing to start populating it is, precisely, the subject of this chapter: enemies.
Thefirstobstaclethatshowsupwhenaddinganenemytoalargemaphasnothingtodowith
artificial intelligence or combat, but with something more basic and, at first glance, baffling:
an enemy placed only once in the code, with a single fixed position, can end up appearing
repeated several times throughout the level. The cause has to do with the size of the VDP
planesandwithhowtheMegaDrivehandlesscrollinginternally,andthesolutioncombinesa
custom sprite positioning function with a constant check of whether each enemy falls within
the camera’s visible bounds.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Chapter25(“Parallaxscrollingontopofacamera”)alreadydone: thischapterpicksup
that same project, with a foreground map on BG_A, a parallax background on BG_B, and
the camera() function already working.
• The fix32 type and the F32_toInt()/F32_fromInt() conversions, covered in Chapter 6.
• Chapter27(“ColortransparencywithoutShadowandHighlight”),whereSPR_setVisibility()
was introduced along with the VISIBLE and HIDDEN values of the SpriteVisibility type.
1. A brief graphical analysis: how Streets of Rage achieves
so much with so little
Before diving into code, it’s worth pausing for a moment on the graphics of Streets of Rage,
one of the most memorable beat ’em ups on the console, because they explain a good part
of the art decisions worth making in a project of this genre. Zooming in on a brick in a wall
337

=== PAGE 344 ===
or a tile on a sidewalk, the pattern turns out to be surprisingly simple and repetitive, with
veryfewcolors;zoomingbackout,ontheotherhand,thewholethinglookssolidandconveys
the sense of a dirty, worn-out street typical of the genre, without ceasing to be colorful. The
trickliesinsprinklingthatrepetitivebasewithuniqueelements—signs,graffiti,loosebricks,
bent fences— that break up the visual monotony without spiking VRAM consumption: most
of the screen is still made up of a handful of tiles reused over and over, and only a handful of
additionaltiles,placedthoughtfully,isenoughfortheresulttonotlookrepetitiveataglance.
Figure 146: Streets of Rage brick pattern zoomed in in Aseprite
The same brick pattern, zoomed in: up close it’s barely a few repeated colors, but on the full
screen it forms a solid, dirty wall.
This same idea —few base tiles, plus a small number of one-off variations— is one worth
keepinginmindwhenpreparinglevelgraphicsforthispartofthemanual’sproject,anditwill
be revisited in more detail in later chapters specifically devoted to preparing level graphics.
2. The problem: a single enemy that repeats across the
whole map
On top of the stage already built in the previous chapter, the logical first step is to add an
enemy: a boss (boss_sprite), with its own X and Y position in fix32 coordinates (so it can
later be combined with movement physics, just like the player), added to the screen after
the player’s sprite and updated inside the camera() function in exactly the same way as the
player:
// Enemy global variables (added alongside the player's)
static Sprite* boss_sprite;
static fix32 boss_x = FIX32(900);
static fix32 boss_y = FIX32(160);
338

=== PAGE 345 ===
// Inside main(), after adding the player sprite
boss_sprite = SPR_addSprite(&boss_sprite_def, F32_toInt(boss_x),
↪ F32_toInt(boss_y),
TILE_ATTR(PAL3, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
// Inside camera(), alongside the player's update
SPR_setPosition(boss_sprite, F32_toInt(boss_x) - new_camera_x, F32_toInt(boss_y) -
↪ new_camera_y);
Thecodecompilesand,onthesurface,everythingworks: thebossappearsinitspositionand
movescorrectlyalongwiththecamera. Theproblemshowsupwhentravelingagoodstretch
of the map to the right: that same enemy appears again, over and over, even though there is
only a single instance of boss_sprite in the code, with a single fixed position.
Figure147: Thebossappearingnexttotheplayerdespitebeingdefinedonlyonceinthecode
Theboss(ontheleft)nexttotheplayer,atapointonthemapwhereitshouldn’tbeaccording
to its fixed position in the code.
3. The cause: plane size and scroll that repeats
The explanation goes back to something already seen in the chapter on parallax scrolling:
when the scroll coordinate of a background plane advances far enough in one direction, that
planestartsrepeatingfromthebeginning. Theexactpointatwhichthescreenstartsrepeat-
ing depends on the plane’s size, configurable with VDP_setPlaneSize(). By default, that size
is64tileswideby32tilestall,whichequals512×256pixels—preciselythemaximumlimitof
an IMAGE resource mentioned in the previous chapter. And what happens to the background
also happens, in practice, to any sprite positioned in map coordinates: once that repetition
limit is reached, the scroll engine shows the same content again from the origin, and the en-
339

=== PAGE 346 ===
emy gives the impression of having been placed again, even though there’s still only a single
instance of it in the code.
VDP_setPlaneSize() takes the width and height of the plane in tiles (with possible values of
32,64,or128)andathirdbooleanparameterrelatedtotheinternalVRAMaddressingmode.
A plane 128 tiles wide, for example, spans 1024 pixels: quite a bit more than the 320-pixel
screenwidthinhigh-resolutionmode,buttherepetitionpointstillexists,justpushedfarther
away.
4. Does changing the plane size solve the problem? No,
and it also has its own drawbacks
Wideningtheplane to128 tileswith VDP_setPlaneSize(128, 32, TRUE) looks, at first glance,
like a reasonable solution. In practice, the result visibly scrambles both the background
and the foreground —the map data already loaded doesn’t fit the same way into a plane of
a different size— and as for the enemy repetition, the change makes no difference at all:
plane size affects background layers, not sprite positions. Furthermore, even if it worked,
increasingtheplanesizerequiresmoreVRAMfortheplaneitself,soitwouldn’tbeagoodfit
for this particular problem either way.
Evenso,VDP_setPlaneSize()doeshavealegitimateandfairlyspecificuse: introorcutscene
sceneswheregraphicalelementsneedtobekeptoffscreenbeforeslidingthemin. Consider,
forexample,ascenewhereseveraldifferentcharactersslidedownfromthetopofthescreen,
one by one, before the level starts. With the default plane size (256 pixels tall), there isn’t
enough vertical space to keep all those characters hidden above the screen before the ani-
mation. The solution, in a case like that, is to increase the plane’s height from 32 to 64 tiles
while keeping the width at 64:
VDP_setPlaneSize(64, 64, TRUE); // 512x512 instead of 512x256, for cutscenes
This gives a 512×512 pixel space instead of the usual 512×256, enough vertical margin to
hide several elements before bringing them down one by one via vertical tile scrolling, a
techniquerevisitedinalaterchapter. Thepracticaltakeawayisthatchangingtheplanesize
isbestreservedforthiskindofone-offcutsceneorintro,whereextraspaceisneededtohide
elementsoffcamera;forthegameitself,it’sbesttoleaveitatitsdefaultsizeandsolveenemy
repetition another way.
5. Revisiting SPR_setPosition() and why a custom function
is needed
With the plane-size option ruled out, the problem needs to be tackled from another angle.
The function SGDK provides to position a sprite, SPR_setPosition(), takes three pieces of
data: the sprite to move and its X and Y coordinates as signed 16-bit integers (s16). The
problem is that the position of the player and the enemies in this project is handled as fix32,
in order to represent fractional positions —essential as soon as jump or smooth-movement
physics are added, as seen in previous chapters— so it needs to be converted to an integer
with F32_toInt() before it can be used with SPR_setPosition(). In addition, the actual on-
screenpositionofanyspritehastosubtractthecameraposition(new_camera_x/new_camera_y):
withoutthatadjustment,thespritestaysfixedatthesamepointonthescreennomatterwhere
the camera moves, instead of moving along with the rest of the stage.
Repeating that conversion and subtraction by hand every time an enemy needs to be po-
sitioned works, but it’s exactly the kind of repetitive code that’s worth wrapping in a cus-
340

=== PAGE 347 ===
tomfunction,especiallyconsideringthatthisprojectwilleventuallyhaveseveralenemieson
screen at once.
6. Writing a custom function: set_enemy_position()
The solution is to write a custom function, similar in spirit to handle_input() or camera(),
that takes the enemy’s fix32 coordinates directly —instead of requiring the conversion to
integer before calling it— and does that conversion internally. While at it, it’s worth having
thefunctionalsotakethewidthandheightofthespriteinquestion,sincethosetwovaluesare
neededlaterontosolvethevisibilityproblem,anddifferentenemiescanhavedifferentsprite
sizes. The prototype, declared before main() alongside the project’s other custom functions,
looks like this:
static void set_enemy_position(Sprite* enemy_sprite, fix32 enemy_x, fix32 enemy_y,
s16 enemy_width, s16 enemy_height);
It’sworthrememberingapointaboutvariablescope: thenamesusedasfunctionparameters
—enemy_sprite, enemy_x, enemy_y, enemy_width, enemy_height— only exist inside that func-
tion. Trying to use them anywhere else in the code, such as inside the main loop, produces a
compilation error stating that the variable is undefined. Any variable that needs to be used
across several different functions, on the other hand, has to be declared globally, outside of
any function.
Inside the body of the function, the first step is to convert the received fix32 coordinates
to s16 integers, with descriptive names that make clear they’ve already gone through the
conversion:
static void set_enemy_position(Sprite* enemy_sprite, fix32 enemy_x, fix32 enemy_y,
s16 enemy_width, s16 enemy_height) {
s16 enemy_x_as_s16 = F32_toInt(enemy_x) - new_camera_x;
s16 enemy_y_as_s16 = F32_toInt(enemy_y) - new_camera_y;
SPR_setPosition(enemy_sprite, enemy_x_as_s16, enemy_y_as_s16);
}
7. A second scope problem: the camera variables
When trying to subtract new_camera_x and new_camera_y inside the new function, the same
kind of error shows up as with the parameters: those two variables had, until now, been
declared inside the camera() function itself, so they only exist there and can’t be used inside
set_enemy_position(). The solution is the same as in any other case of this kind: move the
declaration of new_camera_x and new_camera_y outside of camera(), to the global variables
area near the beginning of the file, alongside current_camera_x and current_camera_y, to
which they are related:
// Camera variables (now global, no longer local to camera())
static s16 current_camera_x;
static s16 current_camera_y;
static s16 new_camera_x;
static s16 new_camera_y;
The body of camera() doesn’t need any other changes: since those two variables already
existed under those names inside the function, pulling their declaration out and leaving it
341

=== PAGE 348 ===
outside doesn’t change the logic at all, it just widens their scope so that any function in the
program —including set_enemy_position()— can read them.
With this change, the function compiles without errors. Calling set_enemy_position() with
the boss’s coordinates instead of the manual call to SPR_setPosition() from section 2, the
visual result is identical to what it was at the beginning of the chapter: the enemy moves
correctlyalongwiththecamera,buttheoriginalproblem—thatitkeepsreappearingseveral
times while traveling across the map— still isn’t solved, because this function, for now, is
simplydoingexactlythesamethingasbefore,justacceptingfix32directlyandhandlingthe
conversion and camera adjustment itself.
8. The real solution: hiding the enemy when it falls outside
the camera
Thesolutiontotheunderlyingproblemistotakeadvantageof SPR_setVisibility(),already
usedinChapter27fortheflickereffect,tohideeachenemyassoonasitson-screenposition
—already adjusted for the camera— falls outside the visible bounds, and to show it again as
soon as it re-enters those bounds. The logic boils down to four checks inside a single if,
joined with || (logical “or”): if the enemy’s on-screen X coordinate is less than 0, or greater
thanthescreenwidth, oriftheYcoordinateislessthan0, orgreaterthanthescreenheight,
the enemy is off camera and must be hidden; otherwise, it must be shown:
static void set_enemy_position(Sprite* enemy_sprite, fix32 enemy_x, fix32 enemy_y,
s16 enemy_width, s16 enemy_height) {
s16 enemy_x_as_s16 = F32_toInt(enemy_x) - new_camera_x;
s16 enemy_y_as_s16 = F32_toInt(enemy_y) - new_camera_y;
if (enemy_x_as_s16 < 0 || enemy_x_as_s16 > HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION ||
enemy_y_as_s16 < 0 || enemy_y_as_s16 > VERTICAL_RESOLUTION) {
SPR_setVisibility(enemy_sprite, HIDDEN);
} else {
SPR_setVisibility(enemy_sprite, VISIBLE);
SPR_setPosition(enemy_sprite, enemy_x_as_s16, enemy_y_as_s16);
}
}
Note the use of HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION and VERTICAL_RESOLUTION, the same constants al-
readydefinedinthecamerachapter(320and224inhigh-resolutionmode),insteadofwriting
thosenumbersdirectlyintothecondition: iftheprojectweretoswitchresolutionmodelater
on, it’s enough to update those two constants in a single place. It’s also worth paying atten-
tion to the comparison operator (==, with two equal signs, not one) and being careful, when
writingthefourchecks,nottomixupanXforaY—aneasymistaketomakewhencopyingand
pasting the same condition four times. And if the project used the low-resolution mode (256
pixels wide instead of 320), the horizontal limit adjusts on its own, because it now depends
on the constant rather than on a fixed number.
Compiling with this logic, the result is already fairly good: the enemy stops repeating across
the whole map and only appears once, exactly where the code places it.
342

=== PAGE 349 ===
9. A subtle bug: the enemy disappears before actually leav-
ing the screen
Moving the camera carefully, however, reveals a small flaw: on the left side of the screen,
the enemy sprite disappears an instant before actually leaving the visible area, leaving a
noticeable gap. This is a common behavior in games from earlier generations, but it looks
out of place in a 16-bit game.
A good trick to clearly reproduce this flaw is to move the enemy’s starting position
muchfartherawayonthemap,sothere’splentyofroomtoslowlyapproachitwith
the camera and observe the exact moment it appears or disappears.
10. The cause and the solution: using the sprite’s width
and height as the margin, not 0
The explanation for the flaw lies in how the Mega Drive positions any sprite: its coordinates
alwayscorrespondtothetop-leftcorneroftheanimationframe. Iftheenemymovesleftand
its on-screen X coordinate reaches 0, at that moment its left edge exactly coincides with the
edge of the screen, but a good part of its body —the sprite’s entire width— is still visible to
the right of that corner. Since the condition hides the sprite as soon as its X is less than 0,
the enemy disappears too soon, while it should still be visible on screen.
Thesolutionistoreplacethatlimitof0withanegativevalueequaltothesprite’sownwidth,
so that the enemy remains visible as long as any part of it —including its right edge— is still
withinthevisiblearea,andonlygetshiddenonceithascompletelyleftthescreen. Thesame
reasoning applies to the top limit: if the map included vertical scrolling, the enemy would
disappear too soon at the top as well, unless that limit is replaced with the sprite’s negative
height instead of 0. Although this particular project’s map only scrolls left to right for now,
it’sworthapplyingthesameadjustmenttotheverticallimittokeepthefunctionreadyforany
kindofmapinthefuture. Thisispreciselywhyset_enemy_position()takesenemy_widthand
enemy_height as parameters, instead of having those values hardcoded inside the function:
static void set_enemy_position(Sprite* enemy_sprite, fix32 enemy_x, fix32 enemy_y,
s16 enemy_width, s16 enemy_height) {
s16 enemy_x_as_s16 = F32_toInt(enemy_x) - new_camera_x;
s16 enemy_y_as_s16 = F32_toInt(enemy_y) - new_camera_y;
if (enemy_x_as_s16 < -enemy_width || enemy_x_as_s16 > HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION ||
enemy_y_as_s16 < -enemy_height || enemy_y_as_s16 > VERTICAL_RESOLUTION) {
SPR_setVisibility(enemy_sprite, HIDDEN);
} else {
SPR_setVisibility(enemy_sprite, VISIBLE);
SPR_setPosition(enemy_sprite, enemy_x_as_s16, enemy_y_as_s16);
}
}
// Actual width and height of each sprite, used as the visibility margin
#define BOSS_WIDTH 56
#define BOSS_HEIGHT 80
// Updated call inside camera(), replacing the one from section 2
set_enemy_position(boss_sprite, boss_x, boss_y, BOSS_WIDTH, BOSS_HEIGHT);
343

=== PAGE 350 ===
It’s worth first testing, as an experiment, a margin value smaller than the sprite’s actual
width (for example, half of it) to confirm that an insufficient margin still leaves part of the
sprite visible off screen before it gets hidden. That confirms that the correct value has to
match the sprite’s actual width (and height) exactly, not an approximate number. With the
margin set to BOSS_WIDTH/BOSS_HEIGHT, the enemy appears and disappears right at the edge
of the screen, without leaving any noticeable gaps or reappearing more than once anywhere
on the map.
11. Adding a second enemy
To confirm that the function is now reusable for any number of enemies, the next step is
to add a second character to the map —for example, a stocky enemy called fat_man in the
code— following exactly the same pattern: declare its sprite and coordinates, add it with
SPR_addSprite() after the player’s sprite, and call set_enemy_position() for it inside cam-
era(), with its own dimensions:
static Sprite* fat_man_sprite;
static fix32 fat_man_x = FIX32(1400);
static fix32 fat_man_y = FIX32(180);
#define FAT_MAN_WIDTH 48
#define FAT_MAN_HEIGHT 64
// Inside main(), alongside the rest of the sprites
fat_man_sprite = SPR_addSprite(&fat_man_sprite_def, F32_toInt(fat_man_x),
↪ F32_toInt(fat_man_y),
TILE_ATTR(PAL3, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
// Inside camera(), alongside the boss's call
set_enemy_position(fat_man_sprite, fat_man_x, fat_man_y, FAT_MAN_WIDTH,
↪ FAT_MAN_HEIGHT);
Whenaddingasecondenemy, it’sworthcarefullycheckingthateachonehasitsownpalette
correctly assigned: it’s easy, when copying and pasting one enemy’s code to create another,
to forget to change the palette and end up with two characters sharing the same colors by
mistake, something that’s usually noticeable right away when compiling because the visual
result looks confusing. It’s also worth keeping in mind, as more characters are added to the
map, twohardwarelimitsalreadycoveredinpreviouschapters: thenumberofsimultaneous
hardware sprites the VDP can display on a single line before they start flickering due to a
lackofslots, andtheamountofRAMavailabletokeeptrackofthepositionandstateofeach
active enemy. This second point —how to neatly organize each enemy’s information, instead
ofpilinguploosevariablesforeachone—isexactlytheproblemtackledinthenextchapters
of this part of the manual, starting with organizing the project into separate header files.
Review exercises
1. Explain why an enemy defined only once in the code can reappear several times across
a large map, in terms of VDP plane size.
2. Why isn’t changing the plane size with VDP_setPlaneSize() a suitable solution for this
chapter’s problem, even though it does have a legitimate use in another context? De-
scribe that other context.
3. Explain the variable scope problem that forced new_camera_x and new_camera_y to be
344

=== PAGE 351 ===
moved outside the camera() function, and why something similar happened with the
parameters of set_enemy_position().
4. Describe the four checks that determine whether an enemy sprite should be hidden for
being off camera, and what each one represents.
5. Whymustthevisibilitylimitbesettothesprite’snegativewidth(orheight)insteadof0,
and what visual problem occurs if that adjustment isn’t made?
345

=== PAGE 352 ===
Chapter 51 — Organizing the
Project with Header Files
How to split the code of a growing game into several .c and .h files, instead of piling it all up
in main.c
The previous chapter left this beat ’em up project with the player, two enemies (boss_sprite
andfat_man_sprite),thecamera()function,theset_enemy_position()function,andahand-
ful of global variables, all living together inside a single main.c file. It works, but it’s already
startingtoshowthetypicalproblemofanygrowingproject: itgetsharderandhardertofind
a function among so much code, and every new enemy, weapon, or mechanic added is going
topilemorelinesontoafilethat’salreadydifficulttonavigate. Thischapterstepsawayfora
moment from the game’s specific content to address something more general, applicable to
any project written in C: how to split that code into several files, organized by topic, without
changing the program’s behavior in the slightest.
It’s worth clarifying from the start that none of what follows is a feature specific to SGDK
or the Mega Drive: header files are a mechanism of the C language itself, and everything
explained in this chapter would apply equally to any other project written in that language.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Chapter 50 (“VDP planes and enemies in a beat ’em up”) completed, since this chapter
picksupexactlyfromthecodeleftattheendofthatone: player_sprite/player_x/player_y,
boss_sprite, fat_man_sprite, set_enemy_position(), and camera().
• The basic C concepts covered in chapter 6: what a declaration is versus a definition,
what a function prototype is, and what the #include directive does.
• Chapter 39 (“The resource compiler in depth”), about how rescomp generates a header
file from a .res file.
1. Why split the code into several files
Thecentralideaofthischaptercanbesummedupinonesentence: insteadofwritingallofa
game’s code inside main.c, it’s better to group it by topic into separate sets of files. One set
of files for everything related to the player, another for the enemies, another for the camera,
and so on as the project requires. Each of these sets usually has, at minimum, a header file
(.h extension) and a corresponding code file, with the same name but a .c extension.
With a project as small as the ones from the early chapters of this manual, splitting the code
intofilesdoesn’tgainmuch: everythingfitscomfortablyonascreenortwo. Butabeat’emup
346

=== PAGE 353 ===
withaplayer, severalenemytypes, acamera, levels, andlatersecondaryweaponsoragame
state system is a different case, and it’s exactly the kind of project this mechanism exists for.
A common problem when setting up a new SGDK project in Visual Studio Code is
thatfunctionautocompletion(IntelliSense)stopsshowingSGDK’sowndescriptions
andsuggestions. Theproblemisalmostalwaysinthesettings.jsonfile,insidethe
project’s.vscodefolder: thesimplestwaytofixitistocopythatfilefromaprevious
project where autocompletion does work, and paste it into the new project.
2. Splitting resources into several .res files
Beforetouchingthecodeitself,it’sworthapplyingthesameideatoresources. Uptonow,this
manual has declared sprites, backgrounds, and music inside a single resources.res file. For
a project with resources for the player, each enemy type, backgrounds, and music, it’s also a
goodideatosplitresourcesintoseveral.resfiles,followingthesamecriteriaasforthecode:
oneresourcefilepertopic. Forexample,res_player.resfortheplayerandres_enemies.res
for the enemies:
// res_player.res
SPRITE player_sprite_def "player_assets/player.png" 5 5 FAST
// res_enemies.res
SPRITE boss_sprite_def "enemies_assets/boss.png" 7 10 FAST
SPRITE fat_man_sprite_def "enemies_assets/fat_man.png" 6 8 FAST
Also note the organization into subfolders within res: player_assets for the player’s images
and enemies_assets for the enemies’, instead of leaving all the image files loose directly in
res. This doesn’t change anything about the rescomp mechanism already covered in chapter
39; it just requires writing the full path starting from res in each SPRITE line, including the
subfolder name.
Thefirsttimeitcompileswiththesefiles,rescompautomaticallygeneratesthecorresponding
header files, res_player.h and res_enemies.h, with the same logic it already used to gen-
erate resources.h when there was a single resource file. There’s no need to touch those
generatedfilesbyhand,butit’sworthreviewingtheircontents,becausetheyuseexactlythe
sameincludeguardmechanismexplainedinsection4ofthischapter,justwithaguardname
automatically generated from the file’s name.
3. Quotes or angle brackets: two ways to include a file
Any file that uses SGDK functions needs to include genesis.h, the library’s general header,
with #include <genesis.h>. The project’s own header files, on the other hand, such as
res_player.h or the ones created in this very chapter, are included using quotes: #include
"res_player.h".
Thisdifferenceinsyntaxisn’tanaestheticwhim. Anglebracketstellthecompilertosearchfor
thefileamongthesystem’sorthelibrary’sstandardincludepaths(that’swhereSGDKlives),
while quotes tell it to search first in the project itself, next to the file doing the including. As
apracticalconvention: <genesis.h>andanyotherlibraryheadergobetweenanglebrackets;
anything that’s the project’s own code goes between quotes.
347

=== PAGE 354 ===
4. From static variables to variables shared across files
Before splitting the code into several files, there’s a problem the previous chapter left pend-
ing without naming it: a good part of this project’s variables and functions (player_sprite,
boss_sprite, camera(), set_enemy_position()) were declared with the static keyword.
Within a single file, static on a global variable or function limits its scope to that same file,
preventing it from accidentally clashing with an identical name defined elsewhere in the
project. It’s good practice when everything lives in main.c, because that file is, in effect, the
only place those variables are used.
Theproblemisthat,assoonasthatsamecodeissplitintoseveralfiles,thatrestrictionstops
making sense: if camera() needs to call set_enemy_position(), which is now going to live in
another file, or if set_enemy_position() needs to read new_camera_x, which is going to live
inathirdfile, noneofthosevariables orfunctionscanremain static anymore. Thekeyword
that replaces static for this purpose is extern, and the rest of this chapter is devoted to
showing exactly where and how to use it.
5. The include guard
Every new header file created in this project — player.h, enemy.h, camera.h — has to start
with a repetitive but indispensable block called an include guard:
#ifndef PLAYER_H
#define PLAYER_H
// (the file's content goes here)
#endif // PLAYER_H
This guard exists to prevent the same header file from being included more than once within
a single program. A file like player.h can end up included, indirectly, from many different
places in the project: for example, enemy.h might need to include player.h to make an en-
emy react to the player’s position, and camera.h might need to include it too for some other
reason. Without an include guard, each of those repeated inclusions would redeclare the
same variables and functions, producing compilation errors — typically redefinition errors —
that are sometimes hard to trace back to their real cause. The guard solves this by mark-
ing, with #define, that the file has already been included once; if the compiler encounters a
second inclusion, #ifndef detects that the marker already exists and jumps straight to the
corresponding #endif, without processing the content again.
The name of the marker (PLAYER_H in the example) is a convention, not a language require-
ment: it just needs to be unique within the project, and using the file’s name in uppercase,
with an underscore instead of the dot, is the simplest way to guarantee that.
It doesn’t matter much whether #include directives are written inside the include
guardorbeforeit(thefilesrescompgeneratesautomatically,forinstance,puttheir
#include <genesis.h> before the guard); both ways work the same. What does
always need to be respected is that the rest of the content (variable, sprite, and
function declarations) stays between the #define and the #endif.
6. Splitting out the player: player.h and player.c
With the guard now clear, the first set of files worth creating is the player’s. Inside the
project’s inc folder, player.h is created, with declarations for everything other files are go-
348

=== PAGE 355 ===
ing to need from the player: the pointer to the sprite, its position in map coordinates, and a
create_player() function that groups the code that used to be loose inside main().
The important difference from how these variables were written in the previous chapter is
that, inside a header file, both the variables and the functions that need to be usable from
other files are declared with the extern keyword in front:
// inc/player.h
#ifndef PLAYER_H
#define PLAYER_H
#include <genesis.h>
#include "res_player.h"
// Player sprite and its position in map coordinates
extern Sprite* player_sprite;
extern fix32 player_x;
extern fix32 player_y;
// Creates the player's sprite and adds it to the scene
void create_player(void);
#endif // PLAYER_H
extern tells the compiler that this variable or function exists and can be used from any file
that includes this header, but that its actual definition (the place where memory is actually
reserved for it, or where the function’s body is written) is somewhere else. That somewhere
else is, by convention, a .c file with the same name, in the src folder:
// src/player.c
#include "player.h"
Sprite* player_sprite;
fix32 player_x = FIX32(40);
fix32 player_y = FIX32(160);
void create_player(void) {
player_sprite = SPR_addSprite(&player_sprite_def, F32_toInt(player_x),
↪ F32_toInt(player_y),
TILE_ATTR(PAL1, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
}
Unlikeplayer.h,player.cdoesn’tneedanyincludeguardortheexternkeyword: it’senough
toincludeplayer.hatthetop,tostaylinkedtothatheader’sdeclarations,andthenwritethe
actual definition of each variable and the full body of each function there. Every extern
declarationina.hfileneeds,somewhereintheproject,exactlyonecorrespondingdefinition;
if that definition were missing, the linker would fail with an undefined symbol error, and if
thereweremorethanonedefinitionforthesamevariablespreadacrossdifferent.cfiles,the
error would be the opposite: symbol defined more than once. This is, in fact, the reason the
previoussectioninsistedonmovingfromstatictoextern: declaringSprite* player_sprite;
directly inside player.h, without extern, would end up generating a new definition of that
variable in every .c file that includes the header, and the project would stop linking as soon
as more than one file included it.
349

=== PAGE 356 ===
7. Splitting out the enemies: enemy.h and enemy.c
The same pattern applies to the enemies’ code, with the difference that here there’s more
thanonevariableofeachtype(oneperenemy)andafunction,set_enemy_position(),which
was already written in the previous chapter and now simply changes files:
// inc/enemy.h
#ifndef ENEMY_H
#define ENEMY_H
#include <genesis.h>
#include "res_enemies.h"
// Actual widths and heights of each sprite, used as a visibility margin
#define BOSS_WIDTH 56
#define BOSS_HEIGHT 80
#define FAT_MAN_WIDTH 48
#define FAT_MAN_HEIGHT 64
extern Sprite* boss_sprite;
extern fix32 boss_x;
extern fix32 boss_y;
extern Sprite* fat_man_sprite;
extern fix32 fat_man_x;
extern fix32 fat_man_y;
// Creates the enemies' sprites and adds them to the scene
void create_enemies(void);
// Repositions an enemy according to the current camera, and hides it
// if its on-screen position falls outside the visible bounds
void set_enemy_position(Sprite* enemy_sprite, fix32 enemy_x, fix32 enemy_y,
s16 enemy_width, s16 enemy_height);
#endif // ENEMY_H
// src/enemy.c
#include "enemy.h"
#include "camera.h"
Sprite* boss_sprite;
fix32 boss_x = FIX32(900);
fix32 boss_y = FIX32(160);
Sprite* fat_man_sprite;
fix32 fat_man_x = FIX32(1400);
fix32 fat_man_y = FIX32(180);
void create_enemies(void) {
boss_sprite = SPR_addSprite(&boss_sprite_def, F32_toInt(boss_x),
↪ F32_toInt(boss_y),
TILE_ATTR(PAL3, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
fat_man_sprite = SPR_addSprite(&fat_man_sprite_def, F32_toInt(fat_man_x),
↪ F32_toInt(fat_man_y),
350

=== PAGE 357 ===
TILE_ATTR(PAL3, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
}
void set_enemy_position(Sprite* enemy_sprite, fix32 enemy_x, fix32 enemy_y,
s16 enemy_width, s16 enemy_height) {
s16 enemy_x_as_s16 = F32_toInt(enemy_x) - new_camera_x;
s16 enemy_y_as_s16 = F32_toInt(enemy_y) - new_camera_y;
if (enemy_x_as_s16 < -enemy_width || enemy_x_as_s16 > HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION ||
enemy_y_as_s16 < -enemy_height || enemy_y_as_s16 > VERTICAL_RESOLUTION) {
SPR_setVisibility(enemy_sprite, HIDDEN);
} else {
SPR_setVisibility(enemy_sprite, VISIBLE);
SPR_setPosition(enemy_sprite, enemy_x_as_s16, enemy_y_as_s16);
}
}
Note that enemy.c includes camera.h in addition to enemy.h: set_enemy_position() needs
toreadnew_camera_x,new_camera_y,HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION,andVERTICAL_RESOLUTION,and
all of that is going to live in the camera file, written in the next section. This is exactly the
kind of dependency between files that a larger project naturally ends up having: enemy.c
needs something from camera.h, just as later on other files are going to need things from
enemy.h or from player.h. As long as each header clearly declares what it exposes and each
include guard prevents repeated declarations, that kind of cross dependency doesn’t cause
any problem.
8. Splitting out the camera: camera.h and camera.c
The last set of files in this reorganization is the camera’s, with the four variables the pre-
vious chapter had turned into globals (current_camera_x, current_camera_y, new_camera_x,
new_camera_y) and the two resolution constants already in use since the 2D camera chapter:
// inc/camera.h
#ifndef CAMERA_H
#define CAMERA_H
#include <genesis.h>
#define HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION 320
#define VERTICAL_RESOLUTION 224
extern s16 current_camera_x;
extern s16 current_camera_y;
extern s16 new_camera_x;
extern s16 new_camera_y;
// Recalculates the camera's position and repositions the player and the enemies
void camera(void);
#endif // CAMERA_H
// src/camera.c
#include "camera.h"
351

=== PAGE 358 ===
#include "player.h"
#include "enemy.h"
s16 current_camera_x;
s16 current_camera_y;
s16 new_camera_x;
s16 new_camera_y;
void camera(void) {
// Calculation of new_camera_x / new_camera_y based on the player's
// position and the map's boundaries (chapter 24)
// ...
SPR_setPosition(player_sprite, F32_toInt(player_x) - new_camera_x,
F32_toInt(player_y) - new_camera_y);
set_enemy_position(boss_sprite, boss_x, boss_y, BOSS_WIDTH, BOSS_HEIGHT);
set_enemy_position(fat_man_sprite, fat_man_x, fat_man_y, FAT_MAN_WIDTH,
↪ FAT_MAN_HEIGHT);
current_camera_x = new_camera_x;
current_camera_y = new_camera_y;
}
camera.h doesn’t need to include either player.h or enemy.h: nothing it declares depends on
them. It’s camera.c that does need them, because the body of camera() uses player_sprite,
player_x, player_y, boss_sprite, fat_man_sprite, and set_enemy_position(). This distinc-
tion—whatgoesinthe.hbecauseotherfilesneedtoknowaboutit,andwhatgoesonlyinthe
.c because it’s an internal implementation detail — is what keeps each header as small and
clearaspossible,andalsoavoidsacirculardependency: player.handenemy.hdon’tneedto
know anything about camera.h, and camera.h doesn’t need to know anything about player.h
or enemy.h.
9. main.c reduced to the essentials
With the three pairs of files already created, main.c is reduced to the include directives for
its own headers and the body of main():
// src/main.c
#include <genesis.h>
#include "player.h"
#include "enemy.h"
#include "camera.h"
int main(bool hard_reset) {
VDP_setScreenWidth320();
SPR_init();
create_player();
create_enemies();
while (TRUE) {
352

=== PAGE 359 ===
camera();
SPR_update();
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return 0;
}
The project’s file tree, after this reorganization, looks like this:
proyecto/
├── inc/
│ ├── player.h
│ ├── enemy.h
│ └── camera.h
├── res/
│ ├── player_assets/
│ │ └── player.png
│ ├── enemies_assets/
│ │ ├── boss.png
│ │ └── fat_man.png
│ ├── res_player.res
│ └── res_enemies.res
└── src/
├── main.c
├── player.c
├── enemy.c
└── camera.c
Whencompiled,theon-screenresultisexactlythesameasattheendofthepreviouschapter:
the player and the two enemies appear at their expected position, the camera follows them
just as before, and none of them duplicate while moving around the map. That is, in fact, the
central point of this chapter: splitting the code into header files and their corresponding .c
files doesn’t change the program’s behavior at all, only its internal organization. The benefit
isn’t as noticeable in a project this size, but as more elements get added — levels, secondary
weapons, more enemy types, a game state system — each with its own pair of files, main.c is
goingtostaysmallandreadable,andallthosefilesaregoingtoenduplinkedtooneanother,
directly or indirectly, through the headers that keep including each other.
Review exercises
1. Explain in your own words what an include guard (#ifndef/#define/#endif) is for in a
header file, and what specific problem it prevents.
2. Why can’t the boss_sprite, boss_x, and boss_y variables, which were static in the pre-
vious chapter, keep being static once enemy.c is a file separate from camera.c?
3. What’sthedifferencebetweendeclaringavariablewithexterninsidea.hfileanddefin-
ing it in the corresponding .c file? What compilation or linking error appears if either
of those two parts is left out?
4. Why is genesis.h included between angle brackets while a header of the project’s own,
like player.h, is included between quotes?
5. enemy.cincludescamera.h,butcamera.hincludesneitherplayer.hnorenemy.h. Explain
why this organization avoids a circular dependency among the project’s three headers.
353

=== PAGE 360 ===
Chapter 52 — Adding Enemies to
the Game
From loose per-enemy variables to arrays, and how to decide how many enemies the screen
can sustain at once
The previous chapter left the project already split into header files: player.h/player.c for
the player, enemy.h/enemy.c for the enemies, and camera.h/camera.c for the camera, with
boss_sprite and fat_man_sprite as the only two enemies on the map, each with its own
pointer to Sprite, its own fix32 position variables, and its own width and height constants.
That pattern — one loose variable for each piece of data for each enemy — works perfectly
well for two named characters, but a beat ’em up needs something more: waves of common
enemies that appear, move, and disappear without each one deserving its own hand-written
setofvariables. Thischapteraddsthatwaveofenemies,showswhytheloose-variablepattern
stops being sustainable as soon as the number of enemies grows, and replaces it with arrays
traversed with a for loop. It closes by returning to a more practical question: how many
enemies can be on screen at the same time before the hardware, or the frame budget itself,
starts to notice.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Chapter 51 (“Organizing the project with header files”) completed, since this chapter
picks up directly from player.h/player.c, enemy.h/enemy.c, and camera.h/camera.c
exactly as they were left there, including set_enemy_position() and the variables
boss_sprite, fat_man_sprite, boss_x, boss_y, fat_man_x, and fat_man_y.
• Arraysandforloops,coveredindepthinchapter17(“Tile-basedscrolling”);thischapter
assumes that syntax is already known and focuses on applying it to a new problem.
• Thelimitsonsimultaneousspritesdependingonresolutionmode,introducedinchapter
10 (“H40 and H32 resolution modes”), and VRAM management and CPU profiling cov-
ered in Part VIII (chapters 45 to 49), which are briefly revisited toward the end of this
chapter.
1. The limit of the “one variable per enemy” pattern
Adding a third enemy using the same approach as boss_sprite and fat_man_sprite is me-
chanical: a Sprite* variable, two fix32 variables for position, two constants for width and
height, a line inside create_enemies() to register it with SPR_addSprite(), and a call to
set_enemy_position()insidecamera(). Noneofthatishard,butit’sexactlythekindofwork
that doesn’t scale: adding a wave of four common enemies — a ninja, a sniper, a stealth
354

=== PAGE 361 ===
ninja, and a boomerang-throwing enemy, all four recruited from the same remake the previ-
ous chapters have been using — would multiply each of those steps by four, and adding ten
moreenemieswouldmultiplythemagain. Thecodeincreate_enemies()andcamera()would
endupasalongstringofnearlyidenticallines,oneperenemy,withtheaddedriskthatcopy-
ing and pasting those lines is also the most common way to introduce silent bugs: a palette
changedbymistake,aYcopiedwhereanXshouldhavegone,acalltoset_enemy_position()
left pointing at the wrong enemy.
The solution to this kind of repetition already appeared earlier in this manual, applied to a
different problem: instead of one variable per enemy, an array with one position per enemy,
traversed with a for loop.
2. Assets for a wave of common enemies
Followingthesameapproachalreadyusedforboss.pngandfat_man.png,thefournewgraph-
ics are added to the enemies_assets subfolder inside res, and res_enemies.res gets one
SPRITE line for each of them, alongside the two that already existed:
// res/res_enemies.res
SPRITE boss_sprite_def "enemies_assets/boss.png" 7 10 FAST
SPRITE fat_man_sprite_def "enemies_assets/fat_man.png" 6 8 FAST
SPRITE ninja_sprite_def "enemies_assets/ninja.png" 3 4 FAST
SPRITE sniper_sprite_def "enemies_assets/sniper.png" 3 4 FAST
SPRITE stealth_sprite_def "enemies_assets/stealth.png" 3 4 FAST
SPRITE boomerang_sprite_def "enemies_assets/boomerang.png" 4 4 FAST
The four common enemies are deliberately small in their number of animation frames, in
keeping with an 8-bit game style: three of them measure 3×4 tiles (24×32 pixels), and the
boomerang-throwing one, a bit wider because of its throwing animation, measures 4×4 tiles
(32×32 pixels). When compiled, rescomp adds the four new definitions to res_enemies.h,
alongside the ones that already existed for boss_sprite_def and fat_man_sprite_def.
The enemies_assets subfolder, with the graphics for boss, fat_man, and the four common
enemies already copied inside.
3. From loose variables to arrays
The first change inside enemy.h is purely declarative: instead of four sets of loose variables
(one for each common enemy), a single array is declared per attribute, with as many slots
as there are common enemies. Each enemy is identified by its position within those arrays,
starting at 0, following the usual C convention:
// inc/enemy.h
#ifndef ENEMY_H
#define ENEMY_H
#include <genesis.h>
#include "res_enemies.h"
// Actual widths and heights for boss and fat_man, used as a visibility margin
#define BOSS_WIDTH 56
#define BOSS_HEIGHT 80
#define FAT_MAN_WIDTH 48
#define FAT_MAN_HEIGHT 64
355

=== PAGE 362 ===
Figure 148: The enemies_assets subfolder with the project’s enemy graphics
extern Sprite* boss_sprite;
extern fix32 boss_x;
extern fix32 boss_y;
extern Sprite* fat_man_sprite;
extern fix32 fat_man_x;
extern fix32 fat_man_y;
// Index of each common enemy within the arrays below
#define ENEMY_NINJA 0
#define ENEMY_SNIPER 1
#define ENEMY_STEALTH 2
#define ENEMY_BOOMERANG 3
#define NUM_ENEMIES 4
// One array per attribute, instead of one set of variables per enemy
extern Sprite* enemy_sprite[NUM_ENEMIES];
extern fix32 enemy_x[NUM_ENEMIES];
extern fix32 enemy_y[NUM_ENEMIES];
extern fix32 enemy_velx[NUM_ENEMIES];
extern const s16 enemy_width[NUM_ENEMIES];
extern const s16 enemy_height[NUM_ENEMIES];
// Creates boss, fat_man, and the four common enemies, and adds them to the scene
void create_enemies(void);
356

=== PAGE 363 ===
// Applies the common enemies' horizontal movement on every frame
void manage_enemies(void);
// Repositions an enemy according to the current camera, and hides it
// if its on-screen position falls outside the visible bounds
void set_enemy_position(Sprite* enemy_sprite, fix32 enemy_x, fix32 enemy_y,
s16 enemy_width, s16 enemy_height);
#endif // ENEMY_H
boss_spriteandfat_man_spritekeeptheirloosevariables: theyareunique,namedenemies
with particular behavior, and there’s no advantage in forcing them into an array meant to
handle several enemies uniformly. The array does make sense, though, for the group of com-
mon enemies, which all behave the same way and differ only in their graphic, their position,
and their speed.
4. create_enemies() with a for loop
In enemy.c, each array is initialized with one value per slot, and an additional array — of
pointers to SpriteDefinition, one per common enemy type — lets a single for loop register
all four on screen, instead of repeating the same call to SPR_addSprite() four times:
// src/enemy.c
#include "enemy.h"
#include "camera.h"
Sprite* boss_sprite;
fix32 boss_x = FIX32(900);
fix32 boss_y = FIX32(160);
Sprite* fat_man_sprite;
fix32 fat_man_x = FIX32(1400);
fix32 fat_man_y = FIX32(180);
Sprite* enemy_sprite[NUM_ENEMIES];
fix32 enemy_x[NUM_ENEMIES] = { FIX32(200), FIX32(500), FIX32(1100), FIX32(1800) };
fix32 enemy_y[NUM_ENEMIES] = { FIX32(180), FIX32(160), FIX32(190), FIX32(170) };
fix32 enemy_velx[NUM_ENEMIES] = { FIX32(0.5), FIX32(-0.3), FIX32(0.4), FIX32(-0.6)
↪ };
const s16 enemy_width[NUM_ENEMIES] = { 24, 24, 24, 32 };
const s16 enemy_height[NUM_ENEMIES] = { 32, 32, 32, 32 };
// One pointer to SpriteDefinition for each common enemy, in the same order
// as the ENEMY_NINJA..ENEMY_BOOMERANG indexes
static const SpriteDefinition* enemy_def[NUM_ENEMIES] = {
&ninja_sprite_def, &sniper_sprite_def, &stealth_sprite_def,
↪ &boomerang_sprite_def
};
void create_enemies(void) {
boss_sprite = SPR_addSprite(&boss_sprite_def, F32_toInt(boss_x),
↪ F32_toInt(boss_y),
357

=== PAGE 364 ===
TILE_ATTR(PAL3, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
fat_man_sprite = SPR_addSprite(&fat_man_sprite_def, F32_toInt(fat_man_x),
↪ F32_toInt(fat_man_y),
TILE_ATTR(PAL3, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
// The four common enemies share palette PAL2, distinct from
// PAL1 (player) and PAL3 (boss and fat_man)
for (u8 i = 0; i < NUM_ENEMIES; i++) {
enemy_sprite[i] = SPR_addSprite(enemy_def[i], F32_toInt(enemy_x[i]),
↪ F32_toInt(enemy_y[i]),
TILE_ATTR(PAL2, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
}
}
boss_spriteandfat_man_spritearestillregisteredbyhand,eachwithitsownline,because
there are only two of them and each explicitly uses its own graphic resource in the code;
the four common enemies, on the other hand, are registered inside the loop, reading their
starting position and their sprite definition from slot i of the corresponding arrays.
5. manage_enemies(): a first artificial intelligence with ar-
rays and for loops
Withthepositionsalreadyinarrays,updatingthemframebyframebecomesasinglefunction
with a single loop, instead of one addition per enemy:
void manage_enemies(void) {
// Each common enemy advances according to its own horizontal speed,
// read from enemy_velx[i]: positive values move to the
// right, negative ones to the left
for (u8 i = 0; i < NUM_ENEMIES; i++) {
enemy_x[i] += enemy_velx[i];
}
}
This is, deliberately, the simplest possible version of an artificial intelligence: each common
enemy walks in a straight line, at a constant speed, without reacting to anything. It’s only a
startingpoint—thefollowingchaptersaddreactiontotheplayer,patrollimits,andbehavior
states — but it’s enough to confirm that the speed array works: if enemy_velx were a single
value instead of one per slot, the four enemies would move at exactly the same speed and in
the same direction, losing the variety they had when each one was an independent variable.
Storingonespeedperenemyinitsownarrayslotiswhatletsthatvarietycomebackwithout
writing a different addition for each one.
6. Integrating the array with the camera
camera() already called set_enemy_position() once for boss_sprite and once for
fat_man_sprite; the four common enemies are added with the same for loop already
used to create them, reading the width and height that correspond to each one from
enemy_width and enemy_height:
// src/camera.c
#include "camera.h"
358

=== PAGE 365 ===
#include "player.h"
#include "enemy.h"
s16 current_camera_x;
s16 current_camera_y;
s16 new_camera_x;
s16 new_camera_y;
void camera(void) {
// Calculation of new_camera_x / new_camera_y based on the player's
// position and the map's limits (chapter 24)
// ...
SPR_setPosition(player_sprite, F32_toInt(player_x) - new_camera_x,
F32_toInt(player_y) - new_camera_y);
set_enemy_position(boss_sprite, boss_x, boss_y, BOSS_WIDTH, BOSS_HEIGHT);
set_enemy_position(fat_man_sprite, fat_man_x, fat_man_y, FAT_MAN_WIDTH,
↪ FAT_MAN_HEIGHT);
for (u8 i = 0; i < NUM_ENEMIES; i++) {
set_enemy_position(enemy_sprite[i], enemy_x[i], enemy_y[i],
↪ enemy_width[i], enemy_height[i]);
}
current_camera_x = new_camera_x;
current_camera_y = new_camera_y;
}
manage_enemies()iscalledonceperpassofthemainloop,beforecamera(),sothatthelatter
positions the enemies that have already moved on screen, rather than the ones from the
previous pass:
// src/main.c
#include <genesis.h>
#include "player.h"
#include "enemy.h"
#include "camera.h"
int main(bool hard_reset) {
VDP_setScreenWidth320();
SPR_init();
create_player();
create_enemies();
while (TRUE) {
manage_enemies();
camera();
SPR_update();
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
359

=== PAGE 366 ===
return 0;
}
Once compiled, all six enemies appear on screen: boss_sprite and fat_man_sprite stand-
ing still in their usual position, and the four common enemies each moving at their own
speed and in their own direction, correctly hiding when they leave the camera thanks to
set_enemy_position().
7. How many enemies the screen can sustain at once
Before adding more enemies, how far can this be pushed? To answer that, it helps to revisit
two hardware limits already seen in Part VIII.
The first is the number of simultaneous hardware sprites the VDP can draw, introduced in
chapter 10: up to 80 in H40 mode (320 pixels wide) or 64 in H32 mode, with a maximum
of 20 per horizontal line in H40 (16 in H32). That limit isn’t counted per character, but per
hardwaresprite,andanSGDKSpritelargerthan32×32pixels(4×4tiles,themaximumsize
of a hardware sprite) is actually made up internally of several chained hardware sprites.
It’sworthdoingthemathwiththeproject’sactualsizes: player_sprite(5×5tiles)
takes up 2×2 = 4 hardware sprites; boss_sprite (7×10 tiles) takes up 2×3 = 6;
fat_man_sprite (6×8 tiles) takes up 2×2 = 4; each of the three 3×4-tile common
enemies takes up 1×1 = 1, and the boomerang-throwing one, at 4×4 tiles, takes
up another 1×1. In total, this chapter’s full scene uses 4 + 6 + 4 + 3 + 1 = 18
hardware sprites, comfortably under the 80 available in H40.
Themarginiscomfortabletoday,butitshrinksfastasprojectiles,items,andeffectsgetadded,
each with its own sprite. The per-line limit is, in practice, the easiest one to hit without
noticing: if several large enemies happened to overlap vertically within the same screen
band,thesumofhardwarespritestheyoccupyonthatlinecouldgetclosetothe20available,
and the VDP simply stops drawing the excess ones on that line, causing flicker. Spreading
enemies across different screen heights, and avoiding stacking several large enemies one
below another, helps keep that margin.
The second limit isn’t the VDP’s but the frame budget itself, covered in chapter 49: every
active enemy adds CPU work on each pass of the main loop — its own movement logic, its
animationupdate, andlateron, collisiondetectionagainsttheplayer—andthatworkhasto
fit,alongwitheverythingelse,withinthe16.7millisecondsofaframeat60framespersecond.
The correct way to know whether a given number of simultaneous enemies is sustainable
isn’ttoguessit,buttomeasureitwithSYS_getCPULoad()whilethegamerunswiththatmany
enemies active and moving, as explained in that chapter.
It’s also worth remembering the VRAM cost of each new enemy type, covered in chapters
45 to 48: every distinct graphic adds its own unique tiles to video memory, and a common
enemy that repeats many times on screen — unlike boss_sprite or fat_man_sprite, which
are unique — is exactly the use case for the manual sprite loading from chapter 48, where
severalinstancesofthesameenemyshareasinglecopyoftheirtilesinsteadofreservingone
per instance.
Inpractice,theconcretefigureof“howmanyenemiesatonce”isn’tafixednumberthatholds
foranyproject: itdependsonthesizeofthesprites,howmuchelseisonscreen(background,
effects, HUD), and how much logic runs per enemy. NUM_ENEMIES is 4 in this chapter because
that’s the size of the wave being added right now, but nothing prevents defining it larger as
360

=== PAGE 367 ===
the project needs it, as long as the hardware-sprite-per-line count and the SYS_getCPULoad()
measurement confirm there’s still margin.
8. The problem coming up: too many parallel arrays
The position array and the speed array already solve this chapter’s problem, but they raise a
new one as soon as you think about what else each common enemy is going to need later on:
hit points (something the common enemies in this remake don’t need, since they die in one
hit, but which bosses will need), whether it’s alive or already defeated, which direction it’s
facing, which animation state it’s in. Each of those attributes, following the same approach
used in this chapter, would require yet another four-slot array, indexed with the same enemy
number as the others but declared and maintained separately. Even enemy_sprite is already,
in effect, one more of these parallel arrays.
Technically, continuing down that path would work, but it would quickly become unmanage-
able: nothing in the language would prevent, for example, updating enemy_x[2] and acciden-
tallyreadingthehitpointsfromenemy_life[1],becausethecompilerhasnowayofknowing
that both slots should refer to the same enemy. The tidy way to solve this — grouping all of
an enemy’s attributes in one place, instead of keeping them spread across parallel arrays of
the same size — is to create a custom data type with a structure (struct), a topic revisited
later in this manual.
Review exercises
1. Explain why boss_sprite and fat_man_sprite kept their loose variables in this chapter,
while the four common enemies moved into an array.
2. What would happen if enemy_velx were a single fix32 variable instead of a four-slot
array? Describe the concrete effect on the common enemies’ movement.
3. Calculatehowmanyhardwarespritesan8×8-tileenemytakesup,andexplainwhythat
number doesn’t necessarily match the number of characters on screen.
4. WhyismeasuringwithSYS_getCPULoad()morereliablethaneyeballinghowmanysimul-
taneous enemies the game can sustain?
5. Describe,inyourownwords,the“parallelarrays”problemthischaptercloseswith,and
why a structure (struct) would solve it better than continuing to add arrays.
361

=== PAGE 368 ===
Chapter 53 — C Structs Applied
to Game Entities
Replacing an enemy’s parallel arrays with a single, purpose-built data type capable of gath-
ering all of its information in one place
Thepreviouschapterleftaproblemonthetablethatwasonlygoingtogetworseovertime: to
handle several enemies at once, instead of a lone boss_sprite and fat_man_sprite, an array
was needed for every attribute — one for the sprite pointers, another for the X coordinates,
another for the Y coordinates, another for the horizontal speed, another for each enemy’s
graphic resource. It works, but every new attribute needed down the line (hit points, a be-
haviortype, itsowntimer)isgoingtorequireaddingyetanotherarray, allthesamesizeand
always walked in parallel, with the constant risk that a position drifts out of sync between
one array and another. This chapter introduces the C language tool designed exactly for this
problem: thestructure,orstruct,whichwasalreadymentionedinpassingbackinchapter6
asoneofthedatatypesavailableinC,butwhichisonlynowusedindepthtomodelsomething
as concrete as an enemy in the game.
Astructureletsyoudefineyourowndatatypethatgroupsseveralrelatedvalues—potentially
of different types — under a single name, so that each enemy becomes a single variable with
several fields inside it, instead of a repeated position across half a dozen separate arrays.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Chapter 52 (“Adding enemies to the game”) completed, since this chapter picks up di-
rectly from the problem it leaves open: several parallel arrays — one per attribute — to
handle more than one enemy on screen.
• Chapter51 (“Organizing the project with header files”), covering extern syntaxand the
project’s organization into player.h/.c, enemy.h/.c, and camera.h/.c.
• Chapter 6 (“C applied to retro development”), covering the u8, s8, and fix32 types, and
Cstructuresingeneral—althoughthischapterrevisitsthedotoperator(.) fromscratch
for anyone who hasn’t used it yet.
1. The starting point: several arrays for one single thing
By the end of the previous chapter, enemy.h and enemy.c had grown beyond the original two
enemiesfromchapter50(boss_spriteandfat_man_sprite),inordertohandleasmallwave
ofenemiesatonce. Themostdirectwaytoachievethat,withoutanynewtools,wastoreplace
each standalone variable with an array of the same type, all indexed the same way: position
362

=== PAGE 369 ===
i of enemy_sprite corresponds to the same enemy as position i of enemy_x, of enemy_y, of
enemy_vel_x, and of enemy_graphic.
// Project state at the end of the previous chapter: one array per attribute
#define MAX_ENEMIES 6
Sprite* enemy_sprite[MAX_ENEMIES];
fix32 enemy_x[MAX_ENEMIES];
fix32 enemy_y[MAX_ENEMIES];
fix32 enemy_vel_x[MAX_ENEMIES];
const SpriteDefinition* enemy_graphic[MAX_ENEMIES];
The problem isn’t that this code is badly written: it compiles and works just as well as be-
fore. The problem shows up the moment one more attribute needs to be added. Hit points,
for instance, would require declaring a sixth array, s8 enemy_hitpoints[MAX_ENEMIES], and
remembering,ateveryplaceinthecodewhereanenemyiscreatedorupdated,totouchthat
array in addition to the other five. The more attributes pile up, the easier it is to forget one
whenwritinganewfunction,orworse,toaccidentallymisalignonearray’sindexagainstthe
others—forexample,byinsertinganenemyinthemiddleofthearrayandforgettingtoshift
one of the five arrays along with the other four.
2. Defining struct Enemy
Thesolutionistostopthinkingintermsof“fivearraysthatliveinsync”andstartthinkingin
terms of “an array of a single thing, which already carries its five attributes inside it.” That
“single thing” is exactly what defining a structure in C lets you do. The syntax is simple: the
struct keyword, whatever name you want to give the new type, a pair of braces with the
attributes inside, and a semicolon at the end.
Anyone already familiar with C might prefer typedef struct instead of the plain
struct TypeNameformusedinthischapter. Thedifferenceismostlystylistic—with
typedef you can write Enemy instead of struct Enemy in every declaration — and
thismanualstickswiththeformwithouttypedefbecauseit’sabitmoreexplicitfor
anyone encountering structures for the first time.
The new type is called Enemy, and it’s defined in enemy.h, alongside the sprite-size constants
that have already been there since chapter 51. The first attribute worth adding is a state
(status), as an unsigned 8-bit integer (u8): for now two values are enough, 0 for an inac-
tive enemy and 1 for an active one, although the data type leaves room to represent other
behaviors later on, such as attacking, taking damage, or chasing the player.
Next come the attributes that already existed as parallel arrays: the x and y coordinates
and the horizontal speed vel_x, all three as fix32, and a pointer to the enemy’s sprite, of
type Sprite*. An attribute meant for future use is also added, hit points (hitpoints), as a
signed 8-bit integer (s8) — most of the regular enemies in this project are going to die in a
single hit, but this attribute is going to matter more for tougher level bosses — along with
each enemy’s graphic resource, graphic, of the same type const SpriteDefinition* already
usedbyboss_sprite_defandfat_man_sprite_def. Finally,sothatset_enemy_position()can
keepcalculatingeachenemy’svisibilitymarginwithoutdependingonafixedmacropertype,
it makes sense for the sprite’s width and height to travel as part of the structure too:
// inc/enemy.h (excerpt)
struct Enemy {
u8 status; // 0 = inactive, 1 = active
fix32 x;
363

=== PAGE 370 ===
fix32 y;
fix32 vel_x;
Sprite* sprite; // NULL until create_enemies() sets it up
s16 width;
s16 height;
s8 hitpoints;
const SpriteDefinition* graphic;
};
3. An array of structures, instead of an array per attribute
With the Enemy type already defined, you can declare an array of elements of that type using
exactly the same syntax already used for the fix32 arrays in section 1, except that now the
datatypeisstruct Enemyinsteadof fix32. Thearrayiscalledcurrent_enemies,anditkeeps
the same size, MAX_ENEMIES, that the parallel arrays it replaces already had:
// inc/enemy.h (excerpt)
extern struct Enemy current_enemies[MAX_ENEMIES];
Like any other variable that needs to be used from several files, it’s declared with extern
inside the .h file and defined, with its actual contents, in the corresponding .c file.
4. Filling in the enemy data
In enemy.c, the actual contents of the array are defined. Each element is written between
braces, with its nine values in the same order in which the structure’s attributes were de-
clared: status, X position, Y position, speed, sprite, width, height, hit points, and graphic.
The sprite attribute is left as NULL for all six enemies, because at this stage no sprite has
been set up on screen yet — that only happens inside create_enemies(), in the next section.
// src/enemy.c
#include "enemy.h"
#include "camera.h"
struct Enemy current_enemies[MAX_ENEMIES] = {
// status, x, y, vel_x, sprite, width,
↪ height, hitpoints, graphic
{ 1, FIX32(900), FIX32(160), FIX32(0), NULL, BOSS_WIDTH, BOSS_HEIGHT,
↪ 5, &boss_sprite_def },
{ 1, FIX32(1400), FIX32(180), FIX32(0), NULL, FAT_MAN_WIDTH, FAT_MAN_HEIGHT,
↪ 3, &fat_man_sprite_def },
{ 1, FIX32(2100), FIX32(160), FIX32(-1), NULL, BOSS_WIDTH, BOSS_HEIGHT,
↪ 5, &boss_sprite_def },
{ 1, FIX32(2600), FIX32(180), FIX32(1), NULL, FAT_MAN_WIDTH, FAT_MAN_HEIGHT,
↪ 3, &fat_man_sprite_def },
{ 0, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL, 0, 0, 0,
↪ NULL },
{ 0, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL, 0, 0, 0,
↪ NULL },
};
The first four elements are left active (status set to 1): the first two reproduce exactly the
364

=== PAGE 371 ===
position of the boss and the fat man that already existed since chapter 50, and the following
two add a second pair of the same graphics, further along the map, with a nonzero vel_x so
they move on their own in addition to following the camera. The last two elements are left
inactive (status set to 0), reserved for adding more enemies in the future without having to
enlarge the array or recompile with a different size.
Storing a width and height of 0 for inactive enemies causes no problem: as long
as status is 0, neither create_enemies() nor manage_enemies() ever reads those
fields, thanks to the check added in the next two sections.
5. The dot operator: how to access an element’s attributes
Toaccessanattributeofanarrayelement,thedotoperator(.) isused: current_enemies[i].status
accesses the state of the enemy at position i, current_enemies[i].graphic accesses its
graphic, and so on for any other attribute of the structure. The reading is literal: first the
array is indexed as usual (current_enemies[i]), and then you navigate inside that element
to the field you need (.status, .x, .sprite, etc.).
This syntax replaces, in a single step, what the parallel arrays required: instead of en-
emy_sprite[i], enemy_x[i], enemy_y[i], and enemy_graphic[i] — four separate arrays, co-
ordinated only by convention — there is now a single array and a single index, and the dot
operator picks the attribute within that element.
6. Simplifying create_enemies() with the dot operator
With all six enemies already defined in the array, create_enemies() can walk through them
with a single for loop, instead of one call to SPR_addSprite() per enemy. Before creating
each sprite it makes sense to check that the corresponding enemy is active: if its status
is nonzero, it’s set up with SPR_addSprite(), taking the graphic resource and the starting
position directly from that array element’s attributes.
// src/enemy.c (continued)
void create_enemies(void) {
for (u8 i = 0; i < MAX_ENEMIES; i++) {
if (current_enemies[i].status != 0) {
current_enemies[i].sprite = SPR_addSprite(current_enemies[i].graphic,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].x), F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].y),
TILE_ATTR(PAL3, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
}
}
}
It’s worth paying attention to a detail that’s easy to overlook: the value returned by
SPR_addSprite() — the pointer to the newly created sprite — has to be stored in cur-
rent_enemies[i].sprite, not discarded. If that assignment were missing, the pointer would
be lost as soon as that loop iteration ended, and manage_enemies() would have no way to
move or hide that sprite later on: the sprite attribute would keep being NULL forever, and
any later call to SPR_setPosition() or SPR_setVisibility() with that pointer would end up
in a runtime error.
365

=== PAGE 372 ===
7. Simplifying position updates: manage_enemies()
The same approach applies to the function that updates the enemies’ position every
frame. Instead of a loop that added the speed to an array of positions and then called
set_enemy_position() for each individual sprite (as camera() did directly at the end of
chapter51,withonecallforboss_spriteandanotherforfat_man_sprite),asingleloopnow
walks through the six elements of current_enemies, adding current_enemies[i].vel_x to
current_enemies[i].x and delegating to set_enemy_position() — the same function from
chapter50,unchanged—thecameraadjustmentandthehidingofspritesoutsidethevisible
bounds.
This loop, as it stands, would also try to move the inactive enemies, whose sprite attribute
is still NULL because no sprite was ever created for them; doing so would produce the same
runtimeerrormentionedintheprevioussection. Thesolutionistoaddthesamecheckalready
used in create_enemies(): process only the enemies whose status is nonzero.
// src/enemy.c (continued)
void manage_enemies(void) {
for (u8 i = 0; i < MAX_ENEMIES; i++) {
if (current_enemies[i].status != 0) {
current_enemies[i].x += current_enemies[i].vel_x;
set_enemy_position(current_enemies[i].sprite, current_enemies[i].x,
↪ current_enemies[i].y,
current_enemies[i].width, current_enemies[i].height);
}
}
}
void set_enemy_position(Sprite* enemy_sprite, fix32 enemy_x, fix32 enemy_y,
s16 enemy_width, s16 enemy_height) {
s16 enemy_x_as_s16 = F32_toInt(enemy_x) - new_camera_x;
s16 enemy_y_as_s16 = F32_toInt(enemy_y) - new_camera_y;
if (enemy_x_as_s16 < -enemy_width || enemy_x_as_s16 > HORIZONTAL_RESOLUTION ||
enemy_y_as_s16 < -enemy_height || enemy_y_as_s16 > VERTICAL_RESOLUTION) {
SPR_setVisibility(enemy_sprite, HIDDEN);
} else {
SPR_setVisibility(enemy_sprite, VISIBLE);
SPR_setPosition(enemy_sprite, enemy_x_as_s16, enemy_y_as_s16);
}
}
After this change, enemy.h ends up with the structure definition, the current_enemies array,
and the prototypes of the three functions:
// inc/enemy.h
#ifndef ENEMY_H
#define ENEMY_H
#include <genesis.h>
#include "res_enemies.h"
// Actual widths and heights of each sprite, used as the visibility margin
#define BOSS_WIDTH 56
366

=== PAGE 373 ===
#define BOSS_HEIGHT 80
#define FAT_MAN_WIDTH 48
#define FAT_MAN_HEIGHT 64
#define MAX_ENEMIES 6
// All of an enemy's attributes, grouped into a single data type
struct Enemy {
u8 status; // 0 = inactive, 1 = active
fix32 x;
fix32 y;
fix32 vel_x;
Sprite* sprite; // NULL until create_enemies() sets it up
s16 width;
s16 height;
s8 hitpoints;
const SpriteDefinition* graphic;
};
extern struct Enemy current_enemies[MAX_ENEMIES];
// Creates the sprite for each active enemy and adds it to the scene
void create_enemies(void);
// Updates the position of each active enemy according to its speed,
// and adjusts the on-screen visibility and position of its sprite
void manage_enemies(void);
// Repositions a sprite according to the current camera, and hides it
// if its on-screen position falls outside the visible bounds
void set_enemy_position(Sprite* enemy_sprite, fix32 enemy_x, fix32 enemy_y,
s16 enemy_width, s16 enemy_height);
#endif // ENEMY_H
With manage_enemies() now centralizing the update of every enemy, camera() stops call-
ing set_enemy_position() once for each enemy known in advance, and instead calls man-
age_enemies() a single time:
// src/camera.c (excerpt from camera(), updated)
void camera(void) {
// Calculation of new_camera_x / new_camera_y based on the player's
// position and the map's boundaries (chapter 24)
// ...
SPR_setPosition(player_sprite, F32_toInt(player_x) - new_camera_x,
F32_toInt(player_y) - new_camera_y);
manage_enemies();
current_camera_x = new_camera_x;
current_camera_y = new_camera_y;
}
367

=== PAGE 374 ===
With the functions already rewritten, the parallel arrays from section 1 (enemy_sprite, en-
emy_x, enemy_y, enemy_vel_x, and enemy_graphic) are removed from enemy.h and enemy.c,
since all of that information now lives inside current_enemies. When compiled, the result
on screen is the same as at the end of the previous chapter — the same four active enemies,
moving and hiding correctly according to the camera — but organized in a way that’s much
simpler to extend: adding a seventh attribute to each enemy, from now on, means adding a
single field to struct Enemy, instead of a new array coordinated by hand with the rest.
8. A problem that remains unsolved: data repeated per
enemy type
Structures solve the parallel-array problem, but they leave a different one unresolved. If it
laterbecamenecessarytochangeoneofthearray’senemiestoadifferenttype—forexample,
turning the second fat_man into a third boss — changing the graphic attribute isn’t enough:
width,height,andhitpointsalsohavetobeupdatedbyhand,separately,sincethosevalues
depend on the enemy type and end up repeated, independently, in every array element that
uses that type. With only two enemy types and four active elements, the risk of forgetting
one of those fields already exists; with more types and more enemies on screen, that risk is
only going to grow.
Rememberingwhichstatusnumbercorrespondstowhichbehaviorisalreadyabit
confusing even with just two possible values (0 and 1); as soon as more states are
added — attacking, taking damage, dying — that problem is also going to need its
own solution.
The solution to both problems — the data repeated per type and the magic numbers used for
status — comes through a related tool that this manual revisits later on: a fixed list of the
possibleenemytypes,eachwithitsownconstantcharacteristics(graphic,hitpoints,size),so
thatchanginganenemy’stypewithincurrent_enemiesisreducedtochangingasinglevalue,
instead of several separate fields at once.
Review exercises
1. Explain in your own words what problem with parallel arrays the use of a structure
(struct) solves in this chapter.
2. Describe the basic syntax for declaring a structure in C, and the syntax for declaring an
array of elements of that type.
3. What is the dot operator used for when working with an array of structures? Give an
example taken from this chapter.
4. Why is it necessary to check the status attribute before operating on an enemy inside
create_enemies() and manage_enemies()?
5. Whatproblemremainsunsolvedattheendofthischapter,relatedtoenemiesthatshare
the same type?
368

=== PAGE 375 ===
Chapter 54 — C Enumerations
(enums)
Replace the loose numbers in the status field with readable names, and use #define for the
quantities that repeat throughout the code
Thepreviouschapterlefteachenemy’sstatusfieldasaplaininteger: 0foraninactiveenemy,
1foranactiveone,withthepromiseofaddingmorevaluesinthefuturetorepresentdifferent
behaviors(attacking, hurt, dying, andsoon). Theproblemisthatmemorizingwhichnumber
represents which behavior becomes, as more values are added, increasingly hard to follow
justbylookingatthecode: anif (current_enemies[i].status != 0)saysnothingonitsown
about what that zero means. This chapter solves that problem with another tool from the C
language that hasn’t been used yet in this manual: the enumeration, or enum, which lets you
give a readable name to each of those numbers.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Chapter 53 (“C structs applied to game entities”) completed, since this chapter works
directly on the Enemy structure and the current_enemies array created there.
• Chapter 52 (“Adding enemies to the game”), where the createEnemies and manageEne-
mies functions were first written, and which this chapter will simplify even further.
• Basic knowledge of C: the #define directive, already used in earlier chapters to create
named constants.
1. Why #define isn’t enough for a list of related values
Before showing enums, it’s worth reviewing the alternative this manual already knew about:
using #define to give a name to each number, for example #define ENEMY_INACTIVE 0 and
#define ENEMY_IDLE 1, and then replacing the loose numbers in the code with those names.
That technique works, but it falls short when dealing with a more or less long list of values
relatedtooneanother,suchasthedifferentpossiblestatesofanenemy. Declaringeachvalue
separatelywithitsown#defineforcesyoutorepeatthekeywordoverandover,saysnothing
anywhere in the code about those names being part of the same closed set of options, and
leaves it up to the programmer not to accidentally repeat the same number in two different
#defines. Whenthevaluesarerelatedtoeachother,it’susuallycleanertogrouptheminside
an enumeration instead of declaring each one separately.
369

=== PAGE 376 ===
2. Defining the EnemyStates enum
The syntax of an enum is similar to that of a struct: the enum keyword, the name you want to
give the list, a pair of braces, and a semicolon at the end. This enum is called EnemyStates,
and it’s declared inside enemies.h, alongside the existing Enemy structure:
// enemies.h
#pragma once
#include <genesis.h>
#include "res_enemies.h"
// Possible values for an enemy's status field
enum EnemyStates {
ENEMY_INACTIVE,
ENEMY_IDLE,
ENEMY_ATTACK,
ENEMY_HURT,
ENEMY_DYING
};
Inside the braces you write the list of possible values, one per line and separated by com-
mas, following the usual C convention of writing them in uppercase. The order chosen, EN-
EMY_INACTIVE, ENEMY_IDLE, ENEMY_ATTACK, ENEMY_HURT, and ENEMY_DYING, leaves room to add
more states in the future, as the enemies’ artificial intelligence becomes more elaborate.
It’s possible to manually assign a number to each value of the enum, by writing an
equals sign followed by that number after each name. But if no number is spec-
ified, the compiler automatically assigns consecutive values starting from 0: the
first value in the list becomes 0, the second 1, and so on, following the same order
in which they were written. It’s best to let the compiler handle this automatic as-
signmentratherthanwritingthenumbersbyhand,unlessthere’saspecificreason
not to follow that consecutive order.
Withthisdeclaration,ENEMY_INACTIVEisworth0andENEMY_IDLEisworth1,exactlythesame
values that had already been used since the previous chapter, only now they have a name.
ENEMY_ATTACK,ENEMY_HURT,andENEMY_DYINGendupdefinedwiththevalues2,3,and4respec-
tively, ready to be used as soon as the project incorporates those behaviors.
3. Replacing the array’s numbers with the enum’s names
With the enum already defined, you can go back to the current_enemies array, in ene-
mies.c, and replace the 0 and the 1 that appeared as the first value of each element with
ENEMY_INACTIVE and ENEMY_IDLE respectively:
// enemies.c
#include "enemies.h"
struct Enemy current_enemies[MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES] = {
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(40), FIX32(160), FIX32(1), NULL, 1, &ninja_sprite_def
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(120), FIX32(160), FIX32(-1), NULL, 1,
↪ &sniper_sprite_def },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(200), FIX32(160), FIX32(1), NULL, 2,
↪ &stealth_ninja_sprite_def },
370

=== PAGE 377 ===
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(280), FIX32(160), FIX32(-1), NULL, 1,
↪ &boomerang_sprite_def },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(360), FIX32(160), FIX32(1), NULL, 1, &ninja_sprite_def
↪ },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(440), FIX32(160), FIX32(0), NULL, 1,
↪ &sniper_sprite_def },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(520), FIX32(160), FIX32(0), NULL, 2,
↪ &stealth_ninja_sprite_def },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(600), FIX32(160), FIX32(0), NULL, 1,
↪ &boomerang_sprite_def },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(680), FIX32(160), FIX32(0), NULL, 1,
↪ &ninja_sprite_def },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(760), FIX32(160), FIX32(0), NULL, 1,
↪ &sniper_sprite_def },
};
Although in this example the active enemies all start out in the ENEMY_IDLE state, nothing
prevents an enemy from starting directly in another state in the future, walking or attacking,
dependingonwhat’sappropriateforeachlevelsituation. Whatmattersisthatthisfirstvalue
of each element now reads clearly: just looking at ENEMY_IDLE or ENEMY_INACTIVE tells you
what state each enemy starts in, without having to remember what each number meant.
4. The behavior doesn’t change
The names in an enum are, ultimately, just a more readable way of writing the same num-
bers as always: the compiled program behaves exactly the same as before this change. It’s
worth confirming this by compiling first without touching anything else, and checking that
the on-screen result matches what you had at the end of the previous chapter. Afterward,
as a test, you can change the state of one of the already active enemies from ENEMY_IDLE
to ENEMY_INACTIVE and compile again: the expected result is that fewer enemies appear on
screen, since that enemy no longer gets registered in createEnemies. Once that behavior is
confirmed, it’s best to set those values back to ENEMY_IDLE before continuing.
5. Simplifying the checks in createEnemies and man-
ageEnemies
The same enum can be used to simplify the if checks that already existed in cre-
ateEnemies and manageEnemies since the previous chapter. Instead of writing if (cur-
rent_enemies[i].status != 0), you now write if (current_enemies[i].status !=
ENEMY_INACTIVE), with exactly the same meaning but much easier to read for anyone
reviewing the code later on:
void createEnemies(void) {
for (u8 i = 0; i < MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES; i++) {
if (current_enemies[i].status != ENEMY_INACTIVE) {
current_enemies[i].sprite = SPR_addSprite(current_enemies[i].graphic,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].x), F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].y),
TILE_ATTR(PAL2, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
}
}
}
371

=== PAGE 378 ===
void manageEnemies(void) {
for (u8 i = 0; i < MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES; i++) {
if (current_enemies[i].status != ENEMY_INACTIVE) {
current_enemies[i].x += current_enemies[i].vel_x;
SPR_setPosition(current_enemies[i].sprite,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].x), F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].y));
}
}
}
Both functions now check current_enemies[i].status != ENEMY_INACTIVE instead of com-
paring against the number 0: createEnemies only registers the sprite of enemies that aren’t
inactive, and manageEnemies only updates the position of those same enemies, avoiding mov-
ing or drawing a sprite that was never actually created.
Anenumisnotthesamethingasa#definemacro,eventhoughinpracticetheyserve
asimilarpurpose: givingareadablenametoavalue. Theenemystatesarehandled
with an enum because they form a closed list of values related to one another, all
referring to the same idea, an enemy’s state; in the following section, on the other
hand,#defineremainstherighttoolforastandaloneconstantthatisn’tpartofany
list.
6. A named constant for the array’s size
There’sanothernumberthatshouldn’tbeleftlooseinthecode: the10thatappearsasthesize
ofthecurrent_enemiesarray,andwhichisalsorepeatedastheupperboundintheforloops
of createEnemies and manageEnemies. If that quantity ever needed to change in the future,
forexampletoallowmoresimultaneousenemiesonscreeninamoredemandinglevel,you’d
have to find and fix each of those occurrences separately, with the risk of missing one.
The solution is the same one already used in earlier chapters for other constants: a #define
directive with a descriptive name, MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES, set equal to 10, declared in
enemies.h alongside the enum and the structure:
// enemies.h
#pragma once
#include <genesis.h>
#include "res_enemies.h"
#define MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES 10
enum EnemyStates {
ENEMY_INACTIVE,
ENEMY_IDLE,
ENEMY_ATTACK,
ENEMY_HURT,
ENEMY_DYING
};
struct Enemy {
u8 status; // One of the values from EnemyStates
fix32 x;
372

=== PAGE 379 ===
fix32 y;
fix32 vel_x;
Sprite* sprite;
s8 hitpoints;
const SpriteDefinition* graphic;
};
extern struct Enemy current_enemies[MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES];
void createEnemies(void);
void manageEnemies(void);
With that macro now defined, the number 10 is replaced both in the array declaration
(current_enemies[MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES]) and in the condition of the two for
loops (i < MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES), so that changing that quantity in the future is
reduced to modifying a single value, in a single place in the code. The createEnemies
and manageEnemies snippets from the previous section already show the final result, with
MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES instead of the number 10 repeated in several places.
After modifying a header file this way, it’s a good idea to do a project clean before
compilingagain. Insomecases,changesmadetoa.hfilearen’tcorrectlyreflected
in the build unless that cleanup is forced first.
7. What’s coming next: structs and enums, once again
Boththestructsfromthepreviouschapterandtheenumsfromthischapterwillbeusedmany
more times later on in this project, and not just for enemies. As an early example, consider
theplayer’sanimations: inaspritewithseveralanimationframes,insteadofreferringtothe
idleframeasnumber0andthewalkingframeasnumber1,anenumwouldallowyoutowrite
something like PLAYER_IDLE and PLAYER_WALKING, with the same gain in readability seen in
this chapter for enemy states. That same pair of tools, a struct to group the fixed attributes
ofathingandanenumtoreplaceitsnumericvalueswithnames,comesupagainlaterinthis
manual to solve a different problem: that of the different enemy types (the basic ninja, the
sniper, the stealth ninja, the one that throws boomerangs), each with its own typical graphic,
hit points, and speed, instead of having those values repeated by hand in each element of
current_enemies.
Review exercises
1. Explain the difference between using several separate #define directives and using a
single enum to represent a list of related values, such as an enemy’s states.
2. Describe the basic syntax for declaring an enum in C, and what value each element
receives if no number is assigned to it by hand.
3. Why doesn’t replacing the numbers in the current_enemies array with the names from
the EnemyStates enum change the behavior of the compiled program?
4. How does using an enum differ from using a #define macro, and when is it best to use
each one?
5. What is the MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES constant created in this chapter for, and what
problem does it avoid compared to writing the number 10 directly in several places in
the code?
373

=== PAGE 380 ===
Chapter 55 — Permanent Enemy
Types
The previous two chapters introduced two tools from the C language: structs, to group an
enemy’sattributesinasingleplace,andenums,togivereadablenamestothedifferentvalues
ofthestatusattribute. Thischaptercombinesbothtoolstosolveaproblemthatwasleftopen
at the end of the chapter on structs: the Enemy struct mixes together, in the same place, data
that changes constantly while a level is being played — position, velocity, current state —
with data that is actually permanent and specific to each enemy type, such as which graphic
it uses, how many hit points it has at the start, or which color palette it’s assigned.
Thesolutionistocreateasecondstruct,EnemyType,exclusivelyforthatpermanentdata,and
a catalog of enemy types built from it. That way, changing an enemy’s type within a level
comesdowntomodifyingasinglevalue,insteadofmanuallyupdatingseveralseparatefields
at once.
Prerequisites
• Chapters53(“CStructsAppliedtoGameEntities”)and54(“CEnumerations(enums)”),
since this chapter works directly with the Enemy struct, the current_enemies array, the
EnemyStates enum, and the createEnemies and manageEnemies functions defined there.
• The difference between ROM and RAM on the Mega Drive, covered in chapter 6, and in
particularwhythe64kilobytesofavailableRAMareamuchmorelimitedresourcethan
the cartridge ROM.
1. Separating what’s permanent from what changes during
the level
The starting point is to go over the Enemy struct field by field and ask which of those fields
belong to each individual enemy instance within a level, and which, instead, belong to the
enemy type and shouldn’t change from one instance to another.
Thestatusfield—whethertheenemyisinactive,active,attacking,etc. —changesconstantly
during the level, so it stays in Enemy. The same goes for the x and y coordinates, the vel_x
velocity, and the sprite pointer, which identifies a specific instance already added to the
screen. The graphic an enemy uses, on the other hand, is something permanent, specific to
the enemy type rather than to any particular instance: the boomerang-throwing enemy will
always use the same boomerang graphic, no matter how many instances of that type exist in
a level.
374

=== PAGE 381 ===
2. Defining the EnemyType struct
Thenewstruct,EnemyType,startswiththegraphicfield—thesameconst SpriteDefinition*
pointer that Enemy already had — because that data really is permanent for each enemy type.
Two more fields are added next: that type’s starting hit points, and the palette it uses.
// enemies.h
// Permanent data for an enemy type: it doesn't change between instances,
// only between different types (boomerang, ninja, sniper, etc.)
struct EnemyType
{
const SpriteDefinition* graphic;
s8 max_health;
u8 palette_used;
};
The hit points field needs to exist in both structs at once, though with a slightly different
nuance in each: in Enemy it represents an instance’s current hit points, which go down as
the player hits it; in EnemyType, instead, it represents how many hit points any instance of
that type should start with when created. To avoid confusing the two meanings, the field in
EnemyType is called max_health instead of hitpoints.
Regarding the palette: it would be possible to reserve, say, PAL3 exclusively for all enemies,
following a simple scheme where PAL0 is for the background, PAL1 for the foreground, and
PAL2 for the player. But there’s no need to follow that scheme rigidly. Each enemy type can
use any of the four palettes available on the Mega Drive, which is why it makes sense for the
palette to be just another field of the enemy type, instead of always assuming the same one
for everybody.
3. A catalog of enemy types, stored in ROM
With the EnemyType struct already defined, an array of that type is declared, enemyTypesList,
following the same syntax already used for current_enemies. It’s given ten slots, on the
assumptionthatagameofthissizeprobablywon’tneedmorethantendifferentenemytypes,
counting level bosses; that number can be expanded later if needed.
// enemies.h
extern const struct EnemyType enemyTypesList[10];
There’s an important difference from current_enemies: this array is declared with the const
keyword before struct. A variable marked as const stays in the cartridge ROM and is never
copied to the console’s RAM. This makes sense for enemyTypesList because its content —
which graphic, how many maximum hit points, and which palette each enemy type gets — is
fixed and never changes during play, unlike current_enemies, whose values change all the
time and therefore do need to live in RAM.
The Mega Drive has only 64 kilobytes of RAM, a much scarcer resource than the
cartridge ROM. That’s why it’s worth marking any data that won’t change during
play as const, so it stays in ROM and doesn’t take up RAM space unnecessarily.
375

=== PAGE 382 ===
4. Filling in the catalog with real data and placeholder
values
In enemies.c, the actual contents of the array are written, using the same brace-list syntax
already used for current_enemies. Of the four enemy types that already exist as graphic
assets — the boomerang enemy, the basic ninja, the stealth ninja, and the sniper — all three
fieldsarefilledin: thecorrespondinggraphic,anumberofmaximumhitpoints,andapalette.
// enemies.c
#include <genesis.h>
#include "enemies.h"
#include "res_enemies.h"
// Catalog of enemy types. Being const, the whole array stays in the
// cartridge ROM and doesn't take up space in the much more limited RAM.
// The health and palette values are provisional: the game's final
// balance hasn't been defined yet, so they can be adjusted later
// without touching any other file.
const struct EnemyType enemyTypesList[10] =
{
{ &boomerang_enemy_sprite, 20, PAL3 }, // BOOMERANG_ENEMY
{ &basic_ninja_sprite, 10, PAL3 }, // BASIC_NINJA_ENEMY
{ &stealth_ninja_sprite, 15, PAL2 }, // STEALTH_ENEMY
{ &sniper_enemy_sprite, 10, PAL3 }, // SNIPER_ENEMY
// Placeholder slots: there aren't any more enemy types defined
// yet, so the boomerang's data is repeated as a placeholder
// until new types are added.
{ &boomerang_enemy_sprite, 20, PAL3 },
{ &boomerang_enemy_sprite, 20, PAL3 },
{ &boomerang_enemy_sprite, 20, PAL3 },
{ &boomerang_enemy_sprite, 20, PAL3 },
{ &boomerang_enemy_sprite, 20, PAL3 },
{ &boomerang_enemy_sprite, 20, PAL3 }
};
ThestealthninjausesPAL2insteadof PAL3inthisexample,preciselytoshowthatthepalette
isn’ttiedtoafixedschemeperentitytype: eachenemytypecantakewhicheverpalettebest
suits its graphic. The array has ten slots, but there are only four real enemy types so far; the
remaining six slots are filled with placeholder values, waiting for more types to be added in
the future.
5. Updating the Enemy struct
With the catalog now in place, the graphic field is removed from the Enemy struct, since that
informationnowlivesexclusivelyinEnemyType. Initsplace, anewfieldisadded, enemy_type,
an unsigned 8-bit integer (u8) that indicates which slot in the enemyTypesList catalog corre-
sponds to that particular instance.
// enemies.h
// Data specific to each enemy instance within a level
376

=== PAGE 383 ===
struct Enemy
{
u8 status;
fix32 x;
fix32 y;
fix32 vel_x;
Sprite* sprite;
s8 hitpoints;
u8 enemy_type;
};
6. Readability with a second enum: EnemyNames
Writing bare numbers inside current_enemies to indicate each enemy’s type would have the
same problem already solved in the previous chapter with the status attribute: they’re hard
torememberandhardtoreadataglance. Thesolutionisthesame: anenum,thistimecalled
EnemyNames, with one name per catalog slot, in the same order they appear there.
// enemies.h
// Readable names for each slot in the enemyTypesList catalog
enum EnemyNames
{
BOOMERANG_ENEMY,
BASIC_NINJA_ENEMY,
STEALTH_ENEMY,
SNIPER_ENEMY
};
Withthisenumdefined,thebarenumbersincurrent_enemiesarereplacedwiththesenames:
insteadofwritinga0toindicatethatanenemyisoftheboomerangtype,BOOMERANG_ENEMYis
written, and likewise for each of the other types.
// enemies.c
struct Enemy current_enemies[MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES] =
{
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(50), FIX32(150), FIX32(1), NULL, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(90), FIX32(150), FIX32(-1), NULL, 0, BASIC_NINJA_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(130), FIX32(150), FIX32(1), NULL, 0, STEALTH_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(170), FIX32(150), FIX32(-1), NULL, 0, SNIPER_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(210), FIX32(150), FIX32(1), NULL, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
377

=== PAGE 384 ===
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ }
};
Thehitpointsfieldisleftat0foralltenelements: asshowninthenextsection,createEnemies
will fill it in automatically from the catalog, so there’s no need to write it by hand for each
element.
7. Reading the catalog from createEnemies
With the graphic field now removed from the Enemy struct, createEnemies needs to be ad-
justed: insteadofreadingthegraphicdirectlyfromcurrent_enemies[i].graphic, itnowhas
to be looked up in the catalog, using that instance’s enemy type as the index: enemyTypes-
List[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].graphic. If the enemy type is BOOMERANG_ENEMY (slot
0 of the catalog), this expression returns the boomerang’s graphic; if it’s any other type, it
returns the graphic corresponding to that slot.
The same pattern is repeated twice more inside createEnemies. The fixed palette within
TILE_ATTRisreplacedwithenemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].palette_used,
soeachenemytypeappearswiththepalettethatmatchesitaccordingtothecatalog. Andthe
starting hit points are no longer written as a bare number: current_enemies[i].hitpoints
= enemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].max_health makes each instance start
the level with the maximum that its type is entitled to.
// enemies.c
void createEnemies()
{
u16 i;
for (i = 0; i < MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES; i++)
{
if (current_enemies[i].status != ENEMY_INACTIVE)
{
// A pointer to the corresponding enemy type is stored,
// to avoid repeating the catalog lookup three times
const struct EnemyType* type =
↪ &enemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type];
current_enemies[i].sprite = SPR_addSprite(type->graphic,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].x), F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].y),
TILE_ATTR(type->palette_used, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
current_enemies[i].hitpoints = type->max_health;
}
}
}
manageEnemiesdoesn’tneedanyfurtherchanges: itstillworksonlywiththefieldsthatchange
during the level — x, vel_x, and sprite — which remain in Enemy unmodified.
378

=== PAGE 385 ===
8. Result and the advantage of this approach
When compiled, enemies appear on screen with the graphic and palette that correspond to
their type, read from enemyTypesList via their enemy_type.
Figure 149: The current_enemies array now with enemy_type
The finished current_enemies array: each instance carries a single enemy_type field instead
of repeating graphic, health, and palette separately.
Changing any enemy’s type within current_enemies shows the advantage of this approach:
it’senoughtochangetheenumnameinasingleplace,forexamplefromBOOMERANG_ENEMYto
SNIPER_ENEMY,andthatenemyswitchestothesniper’sgraphic,palette,andhitpointswithout
touching any other field by hand. Before this chapter, the same change would have required
separately updating the graphic, velocity, and hit points in each affected instance, with the
risk of forgetting one.
This same scheme — a lightweight per-instance struct, plus a const catalog indexed by an
enum — is the one revisited throughout the rest of this part of the manual to solve similar
problems, such as assigning a different artificial intelligence behavior to each enemy type
without duplicating code between instances.
Review exercises
1. Explain, in your own words, the criterion this chapter uses to decide which fields go in
the Enemy struct and which go in the new EnemyType struct.
2. Why is the enemyTypesList array declared with the const keyword, and what practical
differencedoesthatmakecomparedtothecurrent_enemiesarray,whichdoesn’tuseit?
3. What is the enemy_type field in the Enemy struct for, and what data type does it use?
4. ExplainwhattheexpressionenemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].graphic
does, and why it’s necessary after removing the graphic field from the Enemy struct.
379

=== PAGE 386 ===
5. Why was it necessary to name the hit points field in EnemyType as max_health instead of
using the same name as in Enemy?
380

=== PAGE 387 ===
Chapter 56 — Function Pointers
for Enemy AI
How to store an enemy’s behavior, not just its data, inside its type
Chapter 55 solved a real organizational problem: it separated the permanent data of each
enemy type (its graphic, its maximum health, its palette) into a struct of its own, EnemyType,
and gathered them into a catalog, enemyTypesList, indexed by the enemy_type field of each
instance inside current_enemies. Thanks to that, changing an enemy’s type within a level
wasreducedtochangingasinglevalueoftheEnemyNamesenum,insteadofmanuallyupdating
several separate fields.
However, that chapter left a pending problem, and a fairly obvious one at that: regardless
of an enemy’s type, manageEnemies() still applies exactly the same artificial intelligence (AI)
to all of them. That AI, inherited from earlier chapters of the project, simply adds vel_x to
the enemy’s x coordinate and updates its sprite’s position. That’s a reasonable behavior as
a starting point, but it makes no sense for a boomerang-throwing enemy, a regular ninja, a
stealth ninja, and a sniper to all move the exact same way.
This chapter solves that problem in two stages. First, in the most straightforward way possi-
ble: a distinct AI function for each enemy type, selected with a chain of if / else if. That
solutionworks,butitdoesn’tscalewellasnewenemytypesgetadded. That’swhythesecond
stage brings in a C language mechanism that hasn’t been used yet in this manual: function
pointers, which allow the AI of each enemy type to be stored as just another piece of data
inside struct EnemyType, alongside the graphic, health, and palette, and invoked directly
without first asking what type it is.
Pointers in general (what they are, how they’re declared, how they point to data in memory)
were already explained in depth in chapter 6 of this manual. This chapter assumes that
content is already known and focuses on what’s new: a pointer that, instead of pointing to a
piece of data, points to a function.
1. One AI function per enemy type
Thefirststepistocreate,foreachofthefourenemytypesdefinedinthecatalog(boomerang,
basic ninja, stealth ninja, and sniper), an independent function with its own movement
logic. Each of these functions needs a single piece of data: the enemy’s position within
current_enemies, that is, a number between 0 and MAX_ENEMIES - 1. That parameter is
called enemy_number and is declared as u8; the name is a stylistic choice, not a language
requirement.
The prototypes are added in enemies.h, alongside the already existing ones for createEne-
mies() and manageEnemies(), following the pattern enemyName + AI:
381

=== PAGE 388 ===
// enemies.h (excerpt)
void createEnemies(void);
void manageEnemies(void);
// AI functions, one per enemy type
void boomerangAI(u8 enemy_number);
void basicNinjaAI(u8 enemy_number);
void stealthAI(u8 enemy_number);
void sniperAI(u8 enemy_number);
It’s worth remembering that extern only makes sense in a function’s declaration inside a
header file; it should never appear in its definition inside the corresponding .c file, since
that’s where the function’s body is actually written. With that in mind, the bodies are filled
in in enemies.c. For now the goal isn’t a definitive, elaborate AI for each enemy (that will
be revisited later in this manual), but simply to verify that the selection mechanism works,
giving each function a visible difference from the others: some move along the x axis, and at
least one moves along the y axis.
// enemies.c (excerpt)
void boomerangAI(u8 enemy_number) {
current_enemies[enemy_number].x += FIX32(1.5);
SPR_setPosition(current_enemies[enemy_number].sprite,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].x),
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].y));
}
void basicNinjaAI(u8 enemy_number) {
current_enemies[enemy_number].x += FIX32(2.5);
SPR_setPosition(current_enemies[enemy_number].sprite,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].x),
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].y));
}
void stealthAI(u8 enemy_number) {
// Unlike the others, this one moves along the y axis
current_enemies[enemy_number].y += FIX32(0.5);
SPR_setPosition(current_enemies[enemy_number].sprite,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].x),
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].y));
}
void sniperAI(u8 enemy_number) {
// Combines both axes
current_enemies[enemy_number].x += FIX32(1.0);
current_enemies[enemy_number].y -= FIX32(0.5);
SPR_setPosition(current_enemies[enemy_number].sprite,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].x),
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].y));
}
Noticeonedesigndetail: eachfunctionusesafixedspeedvalue,writtendirectlywithFIX32(),
insteadofreadingthevel_xfieldof current_enemies[enemy_number]. Thisisintentional. The
vel_xfieldwasdefinedinearlierchaptersasaper-instanceeditablevalue,meantforastage
of the project where the concept of enemy type didn’t exist yet; if two instances of the same
382

=== PAGE 389 ===
type (two boomerang enemies, for example) had different vel_x values loaded by hand into
current_enemies, they would move at different speeds despite being the same type, which
is inconsistent with the central idea of chapter 55: that an enemy’s behavior depends on its
type, not on loose values loaded per instance. That’s why each AI function defines its own
speed as an internal constant. The vel_x field can still exist in struct Enemy for other future
uses(forexample,anAIthatdoesneedtomodifyitsspeedatruntime),butitisnolongerthe
source that the functions in this chapter draw their movement from.
2. Choosing the right AI in manageEnemies()
With the four functions already written, the next step is to modify manageEnemies() so it de-
cides which one to run based on the current enemy’s enemy_type field. The most direct way
is a chain of if / else if, comparing that field against each value of the EnemyNames enum:
void manageEnemies(void) {
for (u8 i = 0; i < MAX_ENEMIES; i++) {
if (current_enemies[i].status != ENEMY_INACTIVE) {
if (current_enemies[i].enemy_type == BOOMERANG_ENEMY)
boomerangAI(i);
else if (current_enemies[i].enemy_type == BASIC_NINJA_ENEMY)
basicNinjaAI(i);
else if (current_enemies[i].enemy_type == STEALTH_ENEMY)
stealthAI(i);
else if (current_enemies[i].enemy_type == SNIPER_ENEMY)
sniperAI(i);
}
}
}
In every branch, the argument passed is i, the loop variable of the for loop, which is ex-
actlythesamevaluethateachAIfunctioninternallycallsenemy_number: theenemy’sposition
within current_enemies.
Figure 1: The four enemy types on screen, each moving according to its own AI function.
With only four enemy types, this block is perfectly readable, and there’s nothing wrong with
leaving it as is. The problem appears when thinking about the scale of the full project: if the
enemyTypesListcatalogendeduphaving,say,fiftydifferentenemytypes—themaximumthe
array size would allow — manageEnemies() would end up with fifty conditions in a row just to
decide which function to call. It’s the same kind of scalability problem that’s already been
solved earlier in this project: with enums instead of a long list of #defines, and with structs
insteadofindependentparallelarrays. Themoreenemytypesthegamehas,themoreobvious
the need for a tidier solution becomes.
3. Storing behavior, not just data
The AI an enemy uses is, at bottom, a feature just as permanent to its type as its graphic,
its maximum health, or its palette: every boomerang enemy always uses boomerangAI, every
stealth ninja always uses stealthAI, and that association never changes during gameplay.
If the graphic, health, and palette already live inside struct EnemyType, it makes sense for
the AI function to live there too, instead of being decided every frame through a chain of
comparisons inside manageEnemies().
ThedifferencefromtheotherEnemyTypefieldsisthat,insteadofstoringanumberorapointer
383

=== PAGE 390 ===
Figure 150: The four enemy types on screen, each moving according to its own AI function
to a graphical resource, what gets stored now is the function itself that must be executed.
That’swhatfunctionpointersarefor: variablescapableofstoringtheaddressofafunction,
as long as that function has the exact signature the pointer expects (same return type, same
number and type of parameters).
3.1. The syntax of a function pointer
Declaring a field of this type inside struct EnemyType is written like this:
void (*enemyAI)(u8 enemy_number);
The syntax looks a little strange at first glance, because of the extra parentheses and the
asterisk, but it’s easier to understand by comparing it line by line with the normal prototype
of one of the AI functions:
void (*enemyAI)(u8 enemy_number); // the function pointer
void boomerangAI(u8 enemy_number); // a normal function, for comparison
The underlying structure is the same in both cases: first the return type (void, returns noth-
ing), then a name, and between parentheses the parameter list (a single u8 enemy_number).
The only real difference is that, in the function pointer, the chosen name (enemyAI) is en-
closed in parentheses together with an asterisk to its left: (*enemyAI). That asterisk is what
indicates that this isn’t declaring a normal function, but rather a variable capable of storing
the address of any function that matches that signature: one that returns void and takes a
single u8 parameter.
The general pattern for declaring a function pointer is returnType (*cho-
senName)(parameters);. The parentheses around *chosenName are mandatory:
without them, void *enemyAI(u8 enemy_number); would mean something com-
384

=== PAGE 391 ===
pletely different (a normal function, called enemyAI, that returns a pointer to
void).
With that, the field is added to struct EnemyType, right after palette_used:
// enemies.h (excerpt)
struct EnemyType {
const SpriteDefinition* graphic;
u8 max_health;
u8 palette_used;
// AI function that any instance of this enemy type runs
void (*enemyAI)(u8 enemy_number);
};
3.2. Assigning the AI for each type in enemyTypesList
With the field now declared, the next step is to fill it in for each existing entry of enemy-
TypesList, adding the corresponding function name at the end of each brace block, after
the graphic, health, and palette. In C, the name of a function used without parentheses or
arguments evaluates to a pointer to that function, so no special syntax is needed for this
assignment: writing the name is enough.
// enemies.c (excerpt)
const struct EnemyType enemyTypesList[MAX_ENEMY_TYPES] = {
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
{ &basic_ninja_sprite, 15, PAL3, basicNinjaAI },
{ &stealth_ninja_sprite, 12, PAL3, stealthAI },
{ &sniper_sprite, 8, PAL3, sniperAI },
// Filler slots, waiting for new enemy types
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
};
Since the prototypes of the four functions are already declared in enemies.h, and enemies.c
includesthatheaderatthetop,thecompileralreadyknowseachone’ssignaturebythetime
itfillsinthislist,regardlessoftheorderinwhichthefunctiondefinitionsappearfurtherdown
in the same file.
3.3. manageEnemies() reduced to one line
Witheachtype’sAInowstoredinthecatalog,thechainofif/else ifisnolongerneeded. It’s
enough to use the current enemy’s enemy_type field as an index into enemyTypesList, access
its enemyAI field, and call it with parentheses exactly like any other function, passing it i as
the argument:
void manageEnemies(void) {
for (u8 i = 0; i < MAX_ENEMIES; i++) {
if (current_enemies[i].status != ENEMY_INACTIVE)
enemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].enemyAI(i);
}
}
385

=== PAGE 392 ===
The expression enemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].enemyAI(i) reads from
the inside out: current_enemies[i].enemy_type gives the enemy type’s position within the
catalog; enemyTypesList[...] accesses that entry; .enemyAI retrieves the function pointer
stored there; and (i) invokes it, passing i as enemy_number. Since the body of the if is now
reducedtothissinglestatement, thebracesthatusedtosurrounditarenolongernecessary
and can be removed, leaving the whole statement on a single line.
The result on screen is identical to the one obtained with the if / else if chain: each enemy
still moves according to the function corresponding to its type. What changed is the way of
reaching that result. Now, adding a new enemy type to the game — enemy number fifty, if
it came to that — doesn’t require touching manageEnemies() at all: it’s enough to write its
AI function, declare its prototype in enemies.h, and add a new entry to enemyTypesList with
thatfunctionassignedtotheenemyAIfield. manageEnemies()isdoneforgood,nomatterhow
many enemy types the game ends up having.
4. Complete reference code
For reference, here is the header file with everything this chapter contributes, integrated
with what was already defined in chapters 53, 54, and 55:
// enemies.h
#ifndef ENEMIES_H
#define ENEMIES_H
#include <genesis.h>
#include "res_enemies.h"
#define MAX_ENEMIES 10
#define MAX_ENEMY_TYPES 10
// State of an enemy instance within the level (chapter 54)
enum EnemyStatus {
ENEMY_INACTIVE,
ENEMY_ACTIVE,
ENEMY_ATTACKING
};
// Readable names for each position in the enemyTypesList catalog (chapter 55)
enum EnemyNames {
BOOMERANG_ENEMY,
BASIC_NINJA_ENEMY,
STEALTH_ENEMY,
SNIPER_ENEMY
};
// Data that changes instance by instance, within a level (chapter 53)
struct Enemy {
u8 status;
fix32 x;
fix32 y;
fix32 vel_x;
u8 hitpoints;
u8 enemy_type;
Sprite* sprite;
386

=== PAGE 393 ===
};
// Permanent data, specific to each enemy type (chapter 55),
// plus the AI function that corresponds to it (this chapter)
struct EnemyType {
const SpriteDefinition* graphic;
u8 max_health;
u8 palette_used;
void (*enemyAI)(u8 enemy_number);
};
extern struct Enemy current_enemies[MAX_ENEMIES];
extern const struct EnemyType enemyTypesList[MAX_ENEMY_TYPES];
void createEnemies(void);
void manageEnemies(void);
void boomerangAI(u8 enemy_number);
void basicNinjaAI(u8 enemy_number);
void stealthAI(u8 enemy_number);
void sniperAI(u8 enemy_number);
#endif // ENEMIES_H
And here is enemies.c, with createEnemies() reading the graphic, palette, and initial health
from the catalog (a mechanism already explained in chapter 55) and manageEnemies() now
using the function pointer:
// enemies.c
#include "enemies.h"
struct Enemy current_enemies[MAX_ENEMIES] = {
{ ENEMY_ACTIVE, FIX32(100), FIX32(160), 0, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY, NULL },
{ ENEMY_ACTIVE, FIX32(140), FIX32(160), 0, 0, BASIC_NINJA_ENEMY, NULL },
{ ENEMY_ACTIVE, FIX32(180), FIX32(160), 0, 0, STEALTH_ENEMY, NULL },
{ ENEMY_ACTIVE, FIX32(220), FIX32(160), 0, 0, SNIPER_ENEMY, NULL },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, 0, 0, 0, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY, NULL },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, 0, 0, 0, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY, NULL },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, 0, 0, 0, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY, NULL },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, 0, 0, 0, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY, NULL },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, 0, 0, 0, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY, NULL },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, 0, 0, 0, 0, BOOMERANG_ENEMY, NULL },
};
const struct EnemyType enemyTypesList[MAX_ENEMY_TYPES] = {
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
{ &basic_ninja_sprite, 15, PAL3, basicNinjaAI },
{ &stealth_ninja_sprite, 12, PAL3, stealthAI },
{ &sniper_sprite, 8, PAL3, sniperAI },
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
387

=== PAGE 394 ===
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL3, boomerangAI },
};
void createEnemies(void) {
for (u8 i = 0; i < MAX_ENEMIES; i++) {
if (current_enemies[i].status != ENEMY_INACTIVE) {
u8 type = current_enemies[i].enemy_type;
current_enemies[i].sprite = SPR_addSprite(
enemyTypesList[type].graphic,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].x),
F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].y),
TILE_ATTR(enemyTypesList[type].palette_used, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
current_enemies[i].hitpoints = enemyTypesList[type].max_health;
}
}
}
void manageEnemies(void) {
for (u8 i = 0; i < MAX_ENEMIES; i++) {
if (current_enemies[i].status != ENEMY_INACTIVE)
enemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].enemyAI(i);
}
}
void boomerangAI(u8 enemy_number) {
current_enemies[enemy_number].x += FIX32(1.5);
SPR_setPosition(current_enemies[enemy_number].sprite,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].x),
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].y));
}
void basicNinjaAI(u8 enemy_number) {
current_enemies[enemy_number].x += FIX32(2.5);
SPR_setPosition(current_enemies[enemy_number].sprite,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].x),
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].y));
}
void stealthAI(u8 enemy_number) {
current_enemies[enemy_number].y += FIX32(0.5);
SPR_setPosition(current_enemies[enemy_number].sprite,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].x),
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].y));
}
void sniperAI(u8 enemy_number) {
current_enemies[enemy_number].x += FIX32(1.0);
current_enemies[enemy_number].y -= FIX32(0.5);
SPR_setPosition(current_enemies[enemy_number].sprite,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].x),
F32_toInt(current_enemies[enemy_number].y));
388

=== PAGE 395 ===
}
Thenamesboomerang_sprite,basic_ninja_sprite,stealth_ninja_sprite,andsniper_sprite
correspondtotheSpriteDefinitionsgeneratedbyrescompfromres_enemies.res,usingthe
same mechanism seen in earlier chapters of this manual.
Review exercises
1. ExplaininyourownwordswhyapplyingthesameAIfunctiontoeveryenemyinthegame,
without distinguishing its type, becomes a problem as more enemy types are added.
2. What does the enemy_number parameter represent in the boomerangAI, basicNinjaAI,
stealthAI, and sniperAI functions? Which exact piece of data in current_enemies does
it correspond to?
3. Write the general syntax for declaring, inside a struct, a function pointer that returns
nothing and takes a single u8 parameter. What role do the parentheses around the field
name play?
4. ExplainthedifferencebetweenresolvingAIselectionwithachainof if/else ifinside
manageEnemies(), and resolving it with an enemyAI field of function pointer type inside
struct EnemyType. Whatconcreteadvantagedoesthesecondoptionofferasthenumber
of enemy types grows?
5. WhatdoestheexpressionenemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].enemyAI(i);
mean, and exactly what does it replace inside manageEnemies()?
389

=== PAGE 396 ===
Chapter 57 — Game States
A minimal state machine to separate loading a level from running it, put to double use by
turning the player into a struct along the way
Up to this point in the project, the main loop always does the same thing on every pass: it
processes the controls, moves the player, updates the enemies in the current_enemies array,
and refreshes the sprites on screen. That assumption—that the game is always playing a
level—was convenient while the project was limited to a single scrolling screen, but it stops
holdingupassoonasthegameneedstodosomethingotherthanplay: loadanewlevel,show
amenu,orpresentapausescreen. Iftheplayer-controlcoderunsunconditionally,itwillkeep
movingthecharacterevenwhilethegameshouldbebusyloadingdata,whichmakesnosense
and can produce strange behavior.
This chapter introduces the concept of a game state: a variable that indicates at all times
what the game is doing, and which both the main loop and the control functions check be-
fore acting. It’s a simple idea to state, but it’s the foundation on which the actual transition
betweenlevelswillbebuiltinthecomingchapters. Alongtheway,andbecauseit’sworthre-
solving before moving further, this chapter also refactors the player’s data—until now, loose
variables with hand-written coordinates—into a struct Player, following the same pattern
already used for the enemies.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have on hand:
• Theproject as organizedin Chapter 51(“Organizing the project withheader files”): the
player.h/player.c,enemy.h/enemy.c,andcamera.h/camera.cpairs,usingexterntoshare
variables and functions between files.
• Chapters 52 through 56 of this part, which already turned the enemies into a cur-
rent_enemies array of struct Enemy (Chapter 53, “C structs applied to game entities”),
with their own types and states declared as an enum (Chapter 54, “C enumerations
(enums)”) and their AI resolved with function pointers (Chapter 56).
• The two control functions already used in this manual, handle_input() and joyEvent(),
covered respectively in Chapters 31 (“D-pad controls”) and 32 (“Button controls and
event-based reading”), along with the controls.h/controls.c pair where this project’s
input code lives.
• The difference between fix32 (32-bit fixed point) and s16 (16-bit signed integer), ex-
plained in Chapter 6.
390

=== PAGE 397 ===
1. Why the main loop needs to know what state the game
is in
Attheproject’scurrentstage,theplayerandseveralenemiesalreadymoveonscreenthanks
towhatwasdevelopedinpreviouschapters. Allthecontrolcoderunsunconditionally: aslong
as the program is running, the D-pad moves the player and the enemy AI keeps advancing.
Thisworksbecause,sofar,thegameonlyknowshowtodoonething—playthelevelcurrently
loaded in memory—so there has never been a need to distinguish any other situation.
Theproblemappearsassoonasyouthinkaboutwhatcomesnext: loadinganewlevel,show-
ing a title screen, pausing the game. Each of these situations requires the game to stop
behaving as if it were playing a level. Without an explicit way to tell what situation the pro-
gram is in, there’s no way to tell the control code, “don’t move the player right now, we’re
still loading.”
Thesolutionistoaddavariablethatexplicitlyrecordswhatstatethegameisinatanygiven
moment, and to make both the main loop and the control functions check it before acting.
This idea—a program that is, at all times, in one of several possible states, and that reacts
differently depending on which state that is—is, in essence, a finite state machine, an ex-
tremely common design pattern in game development. It already showed up, without being
named as such, when each enemy was given its own state enum in Chapter 54; now the exact
same approach is applied, but at the scale of the whole game.
2. The GameStates enum and the current_game_state vari-
able
2.1. Declaring the possible states
Followingthesameapproachalreadyusedforenemystatesandenemytypes,thegamestates
are declared as an enum. This avoids representing states as bare numbers: a 0 or a 1 with no
namecommunicatesnothingonitsown,whileLOADINGandRUNNING_LEVELdo. Inlevels.h,a
new enum called GameStates is created with two values to start: LOADING, which represents
the moment when the game is loading the resources for a level or a new screen, and RUN-
NING_LEVEL, which represents the moment when a level that’s already loaded is in progress.
// inc/levels.h
#ifndef LEVELS_H
#define LEVELS_H
#include <genesis.h>
// Possible game states. Just two for now: loading data,
// or playing the level that's already in memory. More will
// be added later: a title screen, a menu, maybe a level
// select map.
typedef enum {
LOADING,
RUNNING_LEVEL
} GameStates;
// Current game state, checked from controls.c and from
// the rest of the project before moving the player or the enemies
extern u8 current_game_state;
391

=== PAGE 398 ===
#endif // LEVELS_H
It’sworthnotingthat,althoughthecartridgedoesn’thavethelongloadingtimesofanoptical
medium—loading a level’s data can take as little as one or two sixtieths of a second—a dedi-
catedloading state isstill necessary. Thereason isn’t the lengthof the wait, butthe need for
the loading process not to be interrupted by the rest of the game’s code: while data is being
copied to VRAM or structures are being initialized, it’s best that player control or enemy AI
don’t run at the same time.
For now only these two values are needed, but since the enum already exists, adding a new
state in the future—a title screen, a menu—comes down to writing one more name inside its
braces, without touching the rest of the code that already distinguishes between states by
name.
2.2. Storing the current state in a variable
Declaringthepossiblestatesisn’tenough: thegamealsoneedsavariablethatrecordswhich
of them is the current state at any given instant. For this, current_game_state is created as
an unsigned 8-bit integer (u8), the same type already used for each enemy’s state in Chapter
54: with a range of 0 to 255 there’s more than enough room for any reasonable number of
game states, and using a larger type would waste memory for no benefit.
Like any variable, current_game_state needs an initial value. In levels.c it’s assigned RUN-
NING_LEVEL, so the game starts out directly playing the level that’s already on screen:
// src/levels.c
#include "levels.h"
u8 current_game_state = RUNNING_LEVEL;
This choice is consistent with the project’s current state—there’s still no real level-loading
mechanism, a subject picked back up in Chapter 58 (“Loading different enemies per level”)
and in Chapters 60 and 61—but once real loading is implemented, it will make more sense
for the game to start directly in the LOADING state.
Going deeper. It’s worth naming the pattern explicitly, because it’s going to keep
coming back throughout this manual: what’s being built here is a finite state ma-
chine, a model in which a system can only be, at any given instant, in one of a
fixedsetofstates,andwherespecificevents,likepressingtheStartbutton,trigger
transitions from one state to another. In game engines, almost any element with
complex behavior (the flow of the game, an enemy with AI, an options menu) ends
upbeingmodeledthisway,becauseitkeepsthecodeorganized: insteadofatangle
of conditions stepping on each other, each state knows what to do and which other
states it can move to.
3. Changing state from joyEvent()
Withthestatealreadydeclared,amechanismisneededtochangeitinresponsetotheplayer’s
action. As already seen in Chapters 31 and 32, SGDK distinguishes between two input func-
tions with different purposes: joyEvent(), which fires once per button press and is suited to
one-off actions, and handle_input(), which runs on every pass of the main loop and is suited
to continuous actions, such as moving the player while the D-pad is held down. Advancing
392

=== PAGE 399 ===
to the next screen when Start is pressed is exactly the kind of one-off action joyEvent() is
meant for.
Inside joyEvent(), the transition logic is added: if the current state is RUNNING_LEVEL and
the button that changed in this event was Start, current_game_state is set to LOADING. The
check on the current state isn’t a minor detail: it’s what will allow pressing Start to mean
different things depending on what part of the game you’re in—jumping to the next screen
during gameplay, but perhaps confirming an option inside a menu. Each new state added in
future chapters will likely need its own branch inside these two control functions.
// src/controls.c
#include "controls.h"
#include "levels.h"
#include "player.h"
void handle_input(void) {
if (current_game_state != RUNNING_LEVEL) return;
u16 value = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1);
if (value & BUTTON_RIGHT) {
player_character.x_f32 += FIX32(2);
} else if (value & BUTTON_LEFT) {
player_character.x_f32 -= FIX32(2);
}
}
void joyEvent(u16 joy, u16 changed, u16 state) {
if (current_game_state == RUNNING_LEVEL && (changed & state & BUTTON_START)) {
current_game_state = LOADING;
}
}
Watch out. A common mistake when introducing a new variable in a file other
than the one where it was declared is forgetting the #include for the correspond-
ing header. In this case, controls.c needs current_game_state, RUNNING_LEVEL,
andLOADING,andnoneofthethreeliveincontrols.h: theyliveinlevels.h. Ifthat
#include "levels.h" were missing, the compiler would flag each of those three
identifiers as unrecognized, an error that disappears as soon as the missing #in-
clude is added. It isn’t a conceptual problem with the state machine: it’s simply a
consequenceofhowCsharesknowledgeofsymbolsbetweenfiles,andit’sthesame
kindoferror—anidentifierthatexists,butwhoseheaderwasn’tincludedwhereit’s
needed—that already came up when the project was split apart in Chapter 51, and
one worth recognizing at a glance whenever it reappears.
controls.h, for its part, only needs to declare the two functions (their bodies, and therefore
their internal dependencies, stay in controls.c):
// inc/controls.h
#ifndef CONTROLS_H
#define CONTROLS_H
#include <genesis.h>
void handle_input(void);
void joyEvent(u16 joy, u16 changed, u16 state);
393

=== PAGE 400 ===
#endif // CONTROLS_H
4. From loose variables to a struct Player
4.1. Defining struct Player
Before wrapping up player control, it’s worth resolving a design problem that had been
dragging on since the earliest chapters of this project: the player’s data—its sprite and its
coordinates—stillexistasloosevariables, withitsinitialcoordinateswrittendirectlyasfixed
numbers at the moment the sprite is created. Just as Chapter 53 grouped each enemy’s at-
tributes into a struct Enemy, here it makes sense to group the player’s into a struct Player.
Thenewstructincludestheplayer’sspriteandtwoversionsofitsXandYcoordinates: onein
fix32, the 32-bit fixed-point type, and another in s16, a 16-bit signed integer. The reason for
keepingbothversions,ratherthanjustone,wasalreadyexplainedinChapter6: theplayer’s
movement needs numbers with a fractional part (fix32) because an acceleration of 0.5 or
a jump with gravity rarely advances in whole pixel numbers; however, SPR_setPosition()—
and,lateron,thelevelcollisionroutinesandthecollisionboxcalculations—expecttoreceive
16-bitintegers. Keepingbothversionsavoidsconvertingbetweentypesoneveryuse,though
it requires remembering to keep them in sync.
// inc/player.h
#ifndef PLAYER_H
#define PLAYER_H
#include <genesis.h>
#include "res_player.h"
// Groups all of the player's data into a single structure,
// following the same approach already used in struct Enemy (Chapter 53)
typedef struct {
Sprite* sprite;
fix32 x_f32;
fix32 y_f32;
s16 x_s16;
s16 y_s16;
} Player;
extern Player player_character;
// Creates the player's sprite and adds it to the scene
void create_player(void);
// Updates the on-screen position of the player's sprite
void manage_player(void);
#endif // PLAYER_H
Unliketheenemies,whicharehandledasanarrayofstructs(current_enemies)becausethere
can be several at once, this project’s player is a single character, so it’s enough to declare
a single variable of type Player, called player_character, instead of an array. If a project
needed more than one playable character at the same time—a two-player co-op mode, for
394

=== PAGE 401 ===
example—the same approach used for the enemies, an array of structs, would be the natural
way to go.
4.2. Adapting player.c: create_player() and manage_player()
With the struct already declared, player.c now assigns values to the player_character in-
stance: thefix32fieldsreceivetheinitialpositionvaluesthatusedtobeloosevariables,and
from them the s16 fields are calculated with F32_toInt(), the same function already used in
enemy.c and in camera.c. The call to SPR_addSprite(), which only accepts 16-bit integers,
uses those just-calculated values:
// src/player.c
#include "player.h"
#include "camera.h"
Player player_character;
void create_player(void) {
player_character.x_f32 = FIX32(40);
player_character.y_f32 = FIX32(160);
player_character.x_s16 = F32_toInt(player_character.x_f32);
player_character.y_s16 = F32_toInt(player_character.y_f32);
player_character.sprite = SPR_addSprite(&player_sprite_def,
player_character.x_s16, player_character.y_s16,
TILE_ATTR(PAL1, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
}
void manage_player(void) {
// Subtracts the camera position, just like set_enemy_position()
// does for each enemy (Chapter 50)
player_character.x_s16 = F32_toInt(player_character.x_f32) - new_camera_x;
player_character.y_s16 = F32_toInt(player_character.y_f32) - new_camera_y;
SPR_setPosition(player_character.sprite, player_character.x_s16,
↪ player_character.y_s16);
}
manage_player() is a new function, declared in player.h alongside create_player(). For
now it’s limited to recalculating the on-screen position of the player’s sprite and calling
SPR_setPosition(),exactlywhatusedtobealooselineinsidecamera();thatlineisremoved
from camera.c, which from now on only handles calculating new_camera_x/new_camera_y and
repositioning the enemies with set_enemy_position():
// src/camera.c (updated excerpt)
void camera(void) {
// Calculating new_camera_x / new_camera_y from the player's
// position and the map's boundaries (Chapter 24)
// ...
set_enemy_position(boss_sprite, boss_x, boss_y, BOSS_WIDTH, BOSS_HEIGHT);
set_enemy_position(fat_man_sprite, fat_man_x, fat_man_y, FAT_MAN_WIDTH,
↪ FAT_MAN_HEIGHT);
current_camera_x = new_camera_x;
395

=== PAGE 402 ===
current_camera_y = new_camera_y;
}
In future chapters, manage_player() will grow to handle the player’s physics, level collision,
and,eventually,itsownministatemachine(standing,walking,jumping). Storingtheplayer’s
position in two formats is convenient, but it demands discipline: any code that modifies its
position, whether jump physics or level collision, has to update x_f32/y_f32 first and let man-
age_player() recalculate x_s16/y_s16 from them, or risk having the on-screen version fall
out of sync with the actual version used for calculations. Centralizing that recalculation in a
singleplace,ratherthanscatteringitlooselyacrossseveralfunctions,ispreciselythereason
manage_player() exists.
5. Wiring everything together in main.c and testing the
result
Withthethreepiecesnowconnected—theGameStatesenum,thecurrent_game_statevariable
checked in both joyEvent() and handle_input(), and the Player struct already integrated
intoplayer.c—main.cregistersjoyEvent()oncewithJOY_setEventHandler()(ashasalready
been done since Chapter 32) and calls handle_input(), camera(), and manage_player() on
every pass of the main loop:
// src/main.c
#include <genesis.h>
#include "player.h"
#include "enemy.h"
#include "camera.h"
#include "controls.h"
#include "levels.h"
int main(bool hard_reset) {
VDP_setScreenWidth320();
SPR_init();
JOY_setEventHandler(joyEvent);
create_player();
create_enemies();
while (TRUE) {
handle_input();
camera();
manage_player();
SPR_update();
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return 0;
}
When you compile and test the ROM, the player moves with the D-pad completely normally.
AssoonastheStartbuttonispressed,thestatechangesfromRUNNING_LEVELtoLOADINGand,
396

=== PAGE 403 ===
thankstothecheckaddedinhandle_input(),theD-padstopshavinganyeffectontheplayer:
the state machine is working, even though there still isn’t any code that truly reacts to the
LOADING state beyond blocking movement.
Figure 151: Comparison of the player before and after pressing Start
TheplayermoveswiththeD-padwhilethestateisRUNNING_LEVEL;pressingStartchanges
the state to LOADING and the controls stop responding.
Review exercises
1. Explain,inyourownwords,whyitisn’tenoughfortheD-padtoalwaysmovetheplayer
unconditionally,oncethegamestartshavingmorethanonepossiblescreenorsituation.
2. Whyiscurrent_game_statedeclaredasu8andnot,say,aplainint? Relateyouranswer
to what was covered in Chapter 6.
3. Describe the difference between joyEvent() and handle_input(), and explain why the
state change on pressing Start is written inside the former and not the latter.
4. A classmate adds current_game_state to controls.c and gets an “unrecognized identi-
fier” error, despite having typed the name correctly. What’s the most likely cause, and
how is it fixed?
5. Explainwhystruct Playerstorestheplayer’scoordinatesinbothfix32ands16,rather
thanusingasingledatatypeforbothpurposes,andwhatrolemanage_player()playsin
keeping those two versions in sync.
6. Describe, in your own words, what a finite state machine is and why it’s a pattern likely
to come up several more times throughout this manual.
397

=== PAGE 404 ===
Chapter 58 — Loading Different
Enemies per Level
Everything built so far around enemies —the Enemy struct, the permanent type catalog ene-
myTypesList, and the AI selected through function pointers— coexists with a limitation that
becomes obvious as soon as you think about a complete game: the current_enemies array
representsasingleenemyconfiguration,theonecurrentlyonscreen,anduntilnowthatcon-
figuration could only be changed by editing the code by hand and recompiling. A real game,
however, has dozens of screens or sections, each with its own combination of enemies, and
recompilingtheentireROMeverytimetheplayeradvancestoanewlevelisnotareasonable
option.
This chapter separates two things that until now lived mixed together in a single array: on
one hand, the complete catalog of which enemies correspond to each level or section of the
game —data that never changes during a playthrough and can therefore live permanently in
the cartridge’s ROM—, and on the other, the enemy configuration for the section currently
being played, which continues to live in current_enemies, in RAM, because that is the only
placewherethedatacanbemodifiedwhilethegameisrunning. Thebridgebetweenthetwo
is a new function, copyEnemyArray(), which copies the data for the corresponding section
from the catalog into current_enemies.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have already covered:
• The Enemy struct and the current_enemies array, as they stood at the end of chapter 53
(“C Structs Applied to Game Entities”), and the EnemyStates enum together with the
MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES constant from chapter 54 (“C Enumerations (enums)”).
• The enemyTypesList catalog, the EnemyType struct, and the practice of using const to
keep permanent data in ROM, from chapter 55 (“Permanent Enemy Types”).
• The enemyAI field within EnemyType and the functions boomerangAI, basicNinjaAI,
stealthAI, and sniperAI from chapter 56 (“Function Pointers for Enemy AI”).
• FamiliaritywithmultidimensionalarraysinC(anarrayofarrays),althoughhavingused
them before is not strictly required: this chapter introduces them in practice.
• The GameStates enum and the notion of game state from chapter 57 (“Game States”),
since current_game_section relies on the same idea of a variable that the rest of the
code consults to know what situation the game is in.
398

=== PAGE 405 ===
1. The problem: a single array isn’t enough for multiple
levels
As things stand today, main.c calls createEnemies(), and that function takes the data from
current_enemiesandusesittodisplaytheenemiesonscreen. Thisworksperfectlyaslongas
thegamehasasinglescreen,becausecurrent_enemiesonlyneedstorepresentthatonecon-
figuration. Butassoonasthegamehas,say,fourlevelswithseveralsectionseach,adifferent
enemyconfigurationisneededforeachofthosesections,andcurrent_enemies—designedto
represent a single combination at a time— isn’t enough to store all of them simultaneously.
Thesolutionisn’ttomakecurrent_enemiesbigger,buttoseparatetwodistinctquestionsthat
until now were answered by the same array. The first is which enemies exist in each section
of the game, a fixed answer known ahead of time. The second is which enemies are active
rightnow,inthesectioncurrentlybeingplayed,somethingthatchangesconstantlyastheAI
acts. The first question is solved with a new catalog; the second remains current_enemies.
2. A complete catalog: the all_enemies array
2.1. Declaring an array of arrays
Thecatalogisdeclaredinenemies.hbycopyingthesyntaxalreadyusedforcurrent_enemies,
with three changes. First, the name becomes all_enemies, to reflect that it contains the
enemiesforthewholegameandnotjustthecurrentscreen. Second,asecondpairofbrackets
is added: current_enemies is an array of ten Enemy structs (one for each possible enemy on
screen),whereasall_enemiesisanarrayofarrays,withonerowpersectionofthegameand,
within each row, the same ten slots that current_enemies already has.
The number of sections is, in itself, a number that is best not left loose in the code, following
the same approach already used for MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES in chapter 54. That’s why
a new constant, NUMBER_OF_SECTIONS, is defined. This manual illustrates it with four sections
—as many as the reference project’s levels— but nothing prevents expanding it later if the
game grows: it’s enough to change a single value.
The third change is adding the word const before struct Enemy. Unlike current_enemies,
whosevalueschangeconstantlyastheAIactsoneachenemy,theall_enemiescatalogrepre-
sentstheinitialconfigurationofeachsection,datathatisnevermodifiedduringaplaythrough.
Marking it as const —the same approach already applied to enemyTypesList— ensures that
the entire array is stored in the cartridge’s ROM and doesn’t take up space in the mere 64
kilobytes of available RAM.
// enemies.h
#ifndef _ENEMIES_H_
#define _ENEMIES_H_
#include <genesis.h>
#include "levels.h" // required for current_game_section, used by
↪ copyEnemyArray()
#define MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES 10
#define NUMBER_OF_SECTIONS 4
enum EnemyStates
{
ENEMY_INACTIVE,
399

=== PAGE 406 ===
ENEMY_IDLE,
ENEMY_ATTACK,
ENEMY_HURT,
ENEMY_DYING
};
enum EnemyNames
{
BOOMERANG_ENEMY,
BASIC_NINJA_ENEMY,
STEALTH_ENEMY,
SNIPER_ENEMY
};
struct EnemyType
{
const SpriteDefinition *graphic;
u8 max_health;
u8 palette_used;
void (*enemyAI)(u8 enemy_number);
};
struct Enemy
{
u8 status;
fix32 x;
fix32 y;
fix32 vel_x;
Sprite *sprite;
s8 hitpoints;
u8 enemy_type;
};
extern const struct EnemyType enemyTypesList[MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES];
extern struct Enemy current_enemies[MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES];
extern const struct Enemy
↪ all_enemies[NUMBER_OF_SECTIONS][MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES];
extern void createEnemies(void);
extern void manageEnemies(void);
extern void copyEnemyArray(void);
extern void boomerangAI(u8 enemy_number);
extern void basicNinjaAI(u8 enemy_number);
extern void stealthAI(u8 enemy_number);
extern void sniperAI(u8 enemy_number);
#endif
2.2. Filling in the data, section by section
In enemies.c the actual contents of all_enemies are written out. Since the syntax for each
individual section is identical to what was already used for current_enemies, the fastest way
400

=== PAGE 407 ===
tofillinthecatalogistotakethealready-familiarblockoftenenemiesandrepeatitasmany
times as sections need to be defined, separating each block with a comma and closing the
entire array with a final semicolon.
Tobeabletotellataglancewhenthegamemovesfromonesectiontoanotherduringtesting,
it also helps to vary the contents of each block: the first section is left with a mix of enemy
types, the second is filled entirely with boomerang enemies, the third entirely with stealth
enemies, and the fourth with snipers. In a finished level, each section would also have its
own number of active enemies and its own starting coordinates; for now it’s enough to vary
the type to verify that the copying mechanism works.
// enemies.c
#include "enemies.h"
const struct EnemyType enemyTypesList[MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES] =
{
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL0, boomerangAI }, // BOOMERANG_ENEMY
{ &basic_ninja_sprite, 10, PAL0, basicNinjaAI }, // BASIC_NINJA_ENEMY
{ &stealth_sprite, 10, PAL0, stealthAI }, // STEALTH_ENEMY
{ &sniper_sprite, 10, PAL0, sniperAI }, // SNIPER_ENEMY
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL0, boomerangAI }, // filler, not yet used
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL0, boomerangAI }, // filler, not yet used
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL0, boomerangAI }, // filler, not yet used
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL0, boomerangAI }, // filler, not yet used
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL0, boomerangAI }, // filler, not yet used
{ &boomerang_sprite, 10, PAL0, boomerangAI } // filler, not yet used
};
struct Enemy current_enemies[MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES];
const struct Enemy all_enemies[NUMBER_OF_SECTIONS][MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES] =
{
// Section 0: mix of types, to test variety within a single screen.
{
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(20), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10,
↪ BOOMERANG_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(44), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10,
↪ BASIC_NINJA_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(68), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10,
↪ STEALTH_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(92), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10,
↪ SNIPER_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(116), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10,
↪ BOOMERANG_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(140), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10,
↪ BASIC_NINJA_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL, 0,
↪ BOOMERANG_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL, 0,
↪ BOOMERANG_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL, 0,
↪ BOOMERANG_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_INACTIVE, FIX32(0), FIX32(0), FIX32(0), NULL, 0,
↪ BOOMERANG_ENEMY }
},
401

=== PAGE 408 ===
// Section 1: entirely boomerang enemies, meant to make the section change
↪ obvious.
{
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(20), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(44), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(68), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(92), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(116), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(140), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(164), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(188), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(212), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(236), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, BOOMERANG_ENEMY
↪ }
},
// Section 2: entirely stealth enemies.
{
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(20), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, STEALTH_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(44), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, STEALTH_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(68), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, STEALTH_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(92), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, STEALTH_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(116), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, STEALTH_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(140), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, STEALTH_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(164), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, STEALTH_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(188), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, STEALTH_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(212), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, STEALTH_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(236), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, STEALTH_ENEMY }
},
// Section 3: entirely snipers.
{
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(20), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, SNIPER_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(44), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, SNIPER_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(68), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, SNIPER_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(92), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, SNIPER_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(116), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, SNIPER_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(140), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, SNIPER_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(164), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, SNIPER_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(188), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, SNIPER_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(212), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, SNIPER_ENEMY },
{ ENEMY_IDLE, FIX32(236), FIX32(150), FIX32(1.5), NULL, 10, SNIPER_ENEMY }
}
};
When filling in an array like this, with several structurally identical blocks, it’s
402

=== PAGE 409 ===
easy to lose count and write one block too many or too few. The compiler catches
the mismatch and warns with a message along the lines of “too many initializer
values” as soon as the number of blocks doesn’t match the array’s declared size
(NUMBER_OF_SECTIONSrowsof MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIESelementseach). Theer-
ror is fixed by deleting or adding the missing or extra block; even so, it’s worth
counting the blocks carefully before compiling, rather than relying on the error
message to catch the slip.
3. The copyEnemyArray() function: moving data from ROM
to RAM
Having the complete catalog in all_enemies is useless if createEnemies() and manageEn-
emies() keep reading exclusively from current_enemies, which is where the data actually
shown and modified on screen truly lives. What’s needed, then, is a function that, given
the current section number, copies the corresponding block from all_enemies into cur-
rent_enemies. That function is copyEnemyArray(), already declared as a prototype in the
enemies.h listing in the previous section, alongside createEnemies() and manageEnemies().
Thebodyof copyEnemyArray()walksthroughthetenslotsof current_enemieswithaforloop
and, on each pass, replaces the contents with those of the corresponding enemy within the
indicated section of all_enemies. The expression all_enemies[current_game_section][i]
usestwoindices: thefirstselectsthegamesection,andthesecond,thesameifromtheloop,
selects which of the ten enemies in that section is being copied.
void copyEnemyArray(void)
{
for (u8 i = 0; i < MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES; i++)
{
// Copy entry i of the current section into current_enemies.
current_enemies[i] = all_enemies[current_game_section][i];
}
}
The C language offers a generic function for copying blocks of memory, mem-
cpy(), which in principle could replace this for loop with a single line, some-
thing like memcpy(current_enemies, all_enemies[current_game_section],
sizeof(current_enemies)). Both approaches are valid in C; this manual prefers
theexplicitloopbecauseitmakesvisible,elementbyelement,whatisbeingcopied
and to where, without depending on the source and destination sizes matching
exactly in bytes. If the reader tries memcpy() and finds it more convenient, there’s
no reason not to use it.
4. Linking with the current level: current_game_section
One piece is still missing: where does the section number that copyEnemyArray() uses as an
indexcomefrom? Forthat,anewvariablecalledcurrent_game_sectionisaddedinlevels.h,
in the same style as current_game_state from chapter 57: an unsigned 8-bit integer that
records which section of the game the player is currently in. With 8 bits there’s room for
256 different sections, more than enough even for a game with a great many levels; if some
project needed more, a u16 would offer up to 65 thousand sections at no significant cost.
// levels.h
#ifndef _LEVELS_H_
403

=== PAGE 410 ===
#define _LEVELS_H_
#include <genesis.h>
enum GameStates
{
LOADING,
RUNNING_LEVEL
};
extern u8 current_game_state;
extern u8 current_game_section;
#endif
// levels.c
#include "levels.h"
u8 current_game_state = RUNNING_LEVEL;
u8 current_game_section = 0; // the game always starts in the first section
current_game_sectionplays,forthecurrentlevel,arolesimilartotheonecurrent_game_state
plays for the overall flow of the game: both are variables that a set of functions constantly
consults to decide what to do, and both live in levels.h/levels.c because, conceptually,
theydescribewhatpartofthegametheplayeriscurrentlyin. Asthegamegrows,thesetwo
variables, together with other similar ones, will likely end up grouped into a single struct
that fully describes the state of the current playthrough.
Notethatenemies.halreadyincludeslevels.hinthelistinginsection2.1: withoutthat#in-
clude, the compiler would flag current_game_section as an unrecognized identifier within
enemies.c,sincethatvariableisdeclaredinlevels.handnotinanyfileenemies.cpreviously
knew about. This kind of error —an identifier that exists, but whose header wasn’t included
whereit’sneeded—doesn’tindicateanyconceptualproblemwiththedesign;it’ssimplyacon-
sequence of how C organizes the knowledge of symbols across files, and it’s worth getting
used to recognizing it at a glance as the project grows.
5. Where to call copyEnemyArray()
With the function already written, it remains to decide where to call it from. One option is
to call it in main.c, right before createEnemies(), so that the data is copied first and then
displayed on screen. The option adopted here is to call it as the very first line inside cre-
ateEnemies() itself, so that any code that in the future calls createEnemies() automatically
triggers the data copy without having to remember to call copyEnemyArray() separately.
void createEnemies(void)
{
// Copy the current section's catalog into current_enemies
// before creating any sprite on screen.
copyEnemyArray();
for (u8 i = 0; i < MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES; i++)
{
if (current_enemies[i].status != ENEMY_INACTIVE)
404

=== PAGE 411 ===
{
current_enemies[i].sprite = SPR_addSprite(
enemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].graphic,
F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].x),
F32_toInt(current_enemies[i].y),
↪ TILE_ATTR(enemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].palette_used, TRUE,
↪ FALSE, FALSE));
current_enemies[i].hitpoints =
↪ enemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].max_health;
}
}
}
void manageEnemies(void)
{
for (u8 i = 0; i < MAX_NUMBER_CURRENT_ENEMIES; i++)
{
if (current_enemies[i].status != ENEMY_INACTIVE)
enemyTypesList[current_enemies[i].enemy_type].enemyAI(i);
}
}
This decision does, however, leave a small design detail unresolved: both copyEnemyArray()
and createEnemies() walk through the ten slots of current_enemies with an identical for
loop, which means that, in practice, the same range is traversed twice in a row. It would be
possibletomergebothloopsintoasingleoneandeliminatecopyEnemyArray()asastandalone
function, gaining a bit of efficiency. The criterion adopted here prioritizes clarity: keeping
copyEnemyArray() as a separate function, with a name that describes exactly what it does,
turnsouttobemorereadablethanasingleloopthatdoestwothingsatonce,andthecostof
traversingaten-elementarraytwiceperlevelis,inpractice,negligiblecomparedtothetime
available per frame.
This kind of decision —code clarity versus a marginal savings in CPU cycles— will
come up again throughout this manual. As a general rule, it’s best to prioritize
readability while the performance cost is negligible, and reserve aggressive opti-
mization for code that truly runs with a frequency or data volume that justifies it,
such as routines that run once per frame over many elements at once.
6. Testing the result
Compiling and loading the ROM with current_game_section at 0, the result is identical to
what was already there before this chapter, because the first section of all_enemies was de-
liberately filled with the same mix of enemies that current_enemies already had. Changing
current_game_section to 1 and reloading the ROM shows, instead, the section made up en-
tirely of boomerang enemies; repeating the test with current_game_section at 2 brings up
the stealth enemy section, and with 3, the sniper section.
With current_game_section at 1, the ROM loads the section made up entirely of boomerang
enemies, confirming that copyEnemyArray() copies the correct data from all_enemies.
With this settled, the final piece is still missing for the player to experience a real level
change within the running game: for now, changing sections still requires editing cur-
405

=== PAGE 412 ===
Figure 152: Section 1 loaded with boomerang enemies
rent_game_sectionbyhandandrecompiling. Chapter59(“PreparingLevelGraphics”)takes
a small detour into art and background preparation, before chapter 60 (“In-Game Level
Transition”) picks the code back up to connect current_game_section with the Start button
and the state machine from chapter 57, finally achieving level transitions that happen within
the running game, without recompiling.
Review exercises
1. Explain, in your own words, why current_enemies alone isn’t enough to represent the
enemies of a game with several sections or levels.
2. Describewhateachofthetwoindicesintheexpressionall_enemies[current_game_section][i]
represents.
3. Why is all_enemies declared with the const keyword, while current_enemies is not?
4. Explain the relationship between copyEnemyArray() and createEnemies(): why is the
former called from within the latter, and what would happen if it were never called?
5. ThechapterdescribesadesignalternativethatwouldmergecopyEnemyArray()andcre-
ateEnemies()intoasingleloop. Whyisitdecidednottodoso, despitetheperformance
savings it would offer?
406

=== PAGE 413 ===
Chapter 59 — Preparing Level
Graphics
Where the art for each level of a game with several distinct stages comes from, and how to
organize tilesets, palettes, and maps by level within a single SGDK project
The previous chapters of this part left the project with the player and the enemies organized
into separate files (chapter 51), and with the logic for each enemy to position and hide itself
correctly relative to the camera (chapter 50). The next step in building this beat ’em up is
to let the player move on from one level to the next, each with its own background, its own
foreground,and,likely,itsowncastofenemies. Beforewritingthattransitionlogic,it’sworth
solving a more basic problem, one that none of the previous chapters had to face yet: where
the art for each of those levels comes from, and how it’s organized in the project so that
loading level 2 doesn’t depend on still having level 1’s tiles in memory.
This chapter deals with those two questions. The first part is more a matter of artistic judg-
mentandworkflowthanofcodeitself;thesecondpicksupdirectlyfromtheresourcehandling
alreadycoveredwiththerescompcompiler(partVI)andtheVRAMlimits(partVIII),applying
them to the specific case of a game with multiple backgrounds that are shown, never two at
once, over the course of the game.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it’s worth having fresh in mind:
• TheTILESET,PALETTE,andMAPresources,andtheVDP_loadTileSet(),PAL_setPalette(),
MAP_create(), and MAP_scrollTo() functions, introduced in chapter 11.
• The Tiled workflow and the TILEMAP resource from chapter 12, as a valid alternative to
the MAP resource when a level is designed by painting tiles rather than starting from a
single, already-composed image.
• The split of the project into several .res files by topic, seen in chapter 51, which this
chapter extends from “one resource file per character” to “one resource file per level.”
• The palette and VRAM constraints covered in the chapters on multiple background
palettes (14), managing VRAM limits (45), SGDK 2.x’s new VRAM configuration (46),
and tile reduction (47).
• Basic familiarity with a tile-based graphics editor, such as the Aseprite already used in
chapter 8.
1. Where a level’s art comes from
Noteverylevelofagameneedstobedrawnentirelyfromscratch. Reusingandadaptingart
from an existing game — one’s own, or, in hobby projects made for learning purposes, some
407

=== PAGE 414 ===
well-known classic — is a common production strategy in homebrew development: it lets
youfocuseffortonimprovingandexpandingartthat’salreadyproven,insteadofgenerating,
from a blank page, the sheer volume of tiles a full level needs. An illustrative case, common
in Mega Drive projects made by hobbyists, is starting from the graphics of an 8-bit game on
anearlierconsoleandadaptingthemtotheMegaDrive’scapabilitieswhilekeepingthesame
drawing style and the same tile and sprite size, rather than redesigning the art at a higher
level of detail.
Whatever the source of the art, it’s worth settling two criteria before you start preparing a
level’s tiles:
• The sprite size for the player and the enemies doesn’t change between levels. If
a level’s background art is drawn at a different level of detail than the rest, the player
and enemies will look disproportionate as soon as they’re moved over that background.
Anyreferenceartbeingadapted—whetherfromanearliergameofyourownoranother
source — has to be respected at the same scale the project’s sprites already use.
• Tiles are still 8×8 pixels,theminimumunittheVDPworkswith,asexplainedinchap-
ter 2. This doesn’t change from one level to the next: it’s a hardware constraint, not a
design decision.
Whenthereferenceartcomesfromanexistinggamethatisn’tavailableasaneditableimage
file, a practical technique for gathering reference material is to capture the game running
inside an emulator that supports frame advance, rather than letting it run at normal speed.
Freezing the image frame by frame avoids capturing a screen in the middle of a scroll move-
ment or with an animated element in an unrepresentative in-between position, and lets you
go through a level screen by screen to later combine those captures in a graphics editor and
reconstruct the full layout as a single continuous image. Practically any emulator with an
equivalent frame-advance feature works for this purpose: there’s no technical dependency
on any particular emulator, beyond the convenience of using one you already know.
Oncethatreferenceimagehasbeenassembled,theeditingworkgoesthroughaconventional
tile-based graphics editor (Aseprite, already used in chapter 8): cleaning up the result, snap-
ping it to an 8×8 grid, and starting to apply the color improvements described in the next
section.
2. Making the most of the extra color: contrast and plane
separation, now multiplied per level
The Mega Drive offers four hardware palettes of 15 colors each plus a shared background
color, for a total of 61 simultaneous on-screen colors compared to the 31 of a typical 8-bit
console. Thatdifferenceisn’tputtousebyhavinganindividualtileorspritedrawfrommore
thanonepalette—eachoneisstilllimitedto15colorsplusthebackgroundcolor,asexplained
in chapter 14 — but by spreading different palettes across different elements of the scene so
they contrast clearly.
In this project, the four hardware palettes already have a fixed assignment inherited from
previous chapters: PAL1 for the player and PAL3 for the enemies (chapters 50 and 51). That
leavesPAL0andPAL2availableforlevelbackgrounds,andit’sworthkeepingthatassignment
constant across the thirteen chapters of this part: PAL0 for the foreground (BG_A), where the
level’scollisionlives,andPAL2fortheparallaxbackground(BG_B),whichispurelydecorative.
Eachnewlevelreplacesthecontentsofthosetwopalettes,butneverchangeswhichhardware
palettecorrespondstowhichplane: thatsimplifiestheloadingcode,becausethere’snoneed
to decide again, level by level, which palette number to use.
Withinthosetwoper-levelpalettes,thesameseparationcriterionalreadypracticedinchapter
408

=== PAGE 415 ===
14nowalsoappliesbetweentilesthatcoexistonthesameplane: it’sworthreservingclearly
distinct color ranges for walkable terrain and for the vegetation or decorative elements sur-
rounding it, so that a player can tell at a glance where they can step and where they can’t,
instead of both kinds of tile sharing a similar color range and blending together. That con-
trast matters even more in a game with continuous horizontal scrolling like this one, where
the player doesn’t have time to stop and carefully examine the scenery.
Figure 153: Tileset of a level with palettes differentiated by element
Tilesetofaharborarea: structures,aboat,andwater,eachwithitsownpalettesotheystand
out clearly while moving through the level.
Splittingintobackgroundandforegroundplanesisalsoarequirementforapplying
parallax scrolling (chapter 9): if a level’s reference art comes from a game that
showed everything on a single layer, you have to explicitly decide, while preparing
the tiles, which elements move to the distant background and which stay in the
walkable foreground, before declaring any resource.
3. Organizing resources by level
With the artistic criteria already set, the next step is to bring each level into the project as
itsownsetofresources,followingthesametopic-basedorganizationpatternthatchapter51
appliedtothecharacters: one.resfileperlevel,withitsownimagesubfoldersinsideres. A
levelwithaforegroundandaparallaxbackgroundneeds,atminimum,aTILESET,aMAP(ora
TILESET+PALETTE+TILEMAP if it comes from Tiled), and a PALETTE for each of the two planes:
// res/res_level1.res
// Level 1 foreground (BG_A): walkable terrain
TILESET level1_fg_tileset "level1_assets/foreground.png" BEST ALL
MAP level1_fg_map "level1_assets/foreground.png" level1_fg_tileset BEST 0
409

=== PAGE 416 ===
PALETTE level1_fg_palette "level1_assets/foreground.png"
// Level 1 parallax background (BG_B): distant scenery
TILESET level1_bg_tileset "level1_assets/background.png" BEST ALL
MAP level1_bg_map "level1_assets/background.png" level1_bg_tileset BEST 0
PALETTE level1_bg_palette "level1_assets/background.png"
// res/res_level2.res
TILESET level2_fg_tileset "level2_assets/foreground.png" BEST ALL
MAP level2_fg_map "level2_assets/foreground.png" level2_fg_tileset BEST 0
PALETTE level2_fg_palette "level2_assets/foreground.png"
TILESET level2_bg_tileset "level2_assets/background.png" BEST ALL
MAP level2_bg_map "level2_assets/background.png" level2_bg_tileset BEST 0
PALETTE level2_bg_palette "level2_assets/background.png"
Each new .res file generates, when compiled, its own header (res_level1.h, res_level2.h),
through exactly the same mechanism already seen in chapter 51. If a particular level was
designed by painting tiles in Tiled instead of starting from a single composed image, that
level’s MAP resource is replaced by the TILESET+PALETTE+TILEMAP combination from chapter
12; the rest of this chapter works the same regardless of the specific origin of each map,
because MAP_create() and MAP_scrollTo() don’t distinguish one origin from the other.
4. A catalog of graphics by level
Withtheresourcesfortwolevelsalreadydeclared,what’sneedednowisawaytogothrough
them from code without writing a completely different function for each new level added.
The solution follows the same spirit as a configuration catalog indexed by number, already
practiced in previous chapters for other data that varies from section to section: a structure
that groups together everything needed to display a level, and an array of those structures
indexed by level number.
// inc/level_graphics.h
#ifndef LEVEL_GRAPHICS_H
#define LEVEL_GRAPHICS_H
#include <genesis.h>
// Everything needed to display a full level: a tileset, a map,
// and a palette for the foreground (BG_A), and the same for the
// parallax background (BG_B).
typedef struct {
const TileSet* foreground_tileset;
const MapDefinition* foreground_map;
const Palette* foreground_palette;
const TileSet* background_tileset;
const MapDefinition* background_map;
const Palette* background_palette;
} LevelGraphics;
extern const LevelGraphics level_graphics_table[];
extern const u8 level_count;
410

=== PAGE 417 ===
extern Map* foreground_map;
extern Map* background_map;
// Loads the given level's graphics into VRAM and sets up the
// corresponding background planes, freeing the previous level's if there was one
void load_level_graphics(u8 level_index);
#endif // LEVEL_GRAPHICS_H
// src/level_graphics.c
#include "level_graphics.h"
#include "res_level1.h"
#include "res_level2.h"
const LevelGraphics level_graphics_table[] = {
{ &level1_fg_tileset, &level1_fg_map, &level1_fg_palette,
&level1_bg_tileset, &level1_bg_map, &level1_bg_palette },
{ &level2_fg_tileset, &level2_fg_map, &level2_fg_palette,
&level2_bg_tileset, &level2_bg_map, &level2_bg_palette },
};
const u8 level_count = sizeof(level_graphics_table) / sizeof(LevelGraphics);
Map* foreground_map;
Map* background_map;
void load_level_graphics(u8 level_index) {
const LevelGraphics* level = &level_graphics_table[level_index];
// If a previous level was already loaded, its Map structure in RAM
// is freed before creating the new one; there's no need to separately
// erase the tiles in VRAM, because the new VDP_loadTileSet() overwrites
// them directly by loading into the same index range.
if (foreground_map != NULL) MEM_free(foreground_map);
if (background_map != NULL) MEM_free(background_map);
// PAL0 and PAL2 remain reserved for level backgrounds throughout
// the whole project; PAL1 and PAL3 remain the player's and the enemies'.
PAL_setPalette(PAL0, level->foreground_palette->data, DMA);
PAL_setPalette(PAL2, level->background_palette->data, DMA);
// The background is loaded right after the foreground in VRAM,
// using the foreground's actual tile count as the offset.
VDP_loadTileSet(level->foreground_tileset, TILE_USER_INDEX, DMA);
VDP_loadTileSet(level->background_tileset,
TILE_USER_INDEX + level->foreground_tileset->numTile, DMA);
foreground_map = MAP_create(level->foreground_map, BG_A,
TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, TILE_USER_INDEX));
background_map = MAP_create(level->background_map, BG_B,
TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL2, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE,
TILE_USER_INDEX + level->foreground_tileset->numTile));
411

=== PAGE 418 ===
MAP_scrollTo(foreground_map, 0, 0);
MAP_scrollTo(background_map, 0, 0);
}
load_level_graphics()canbecalledbothwhenthegamestarts,withload_level_graphics(0)
for the first level, and later in the project once a level-transition function exists: it’s enough
to call it again with the number of the next level for the background, the foreground, and
their palettes to change completely. The if (foreground_map != NULL) check prevents the
first time the function is called from trying to free a structure that doesn’t exist yet; on any
later call, however, that pointer already points to the previous level’s map and needs to be
freed before it’s replaced, so as not to leave allocated memory unused.
Note that the VRAM index where the background is loaded (TILE_USER_INDEX + level-
>foreground_tileset->numTile) is calculated from the actual tile count of that particular
level’s foreground, taken from the numTile field of the TileSet structure, rather than a fixed,
hand-written number. This matters because different levels are almost certainly not going
to have the same number of unique tiles in their foreground, so a fixed offset that works for
level 1 could cause level 2’s background to partially overlap its own foreground if the latter
turned out to have more tiles.
5. The VRAM budget is no longer for a single background,
it’s for the whole level
The chapters on managing VRAM limits (45), SGDK 2.x’s new configuration (46), and tile
reduction (47) already explained how to calculate how many unique tiles fit into the space
available starting from TILE_USER_INDEX. With a single background on screen, that calcula-
tion was done once. With a level split into a foreground and a parallax background, the
number that matters is the sum of the unique tiles in both: level->foreground_tileset-
>numTile + level->background_tileset->numTilecan’texceedtheVRAMspacefreeforuser
tiles,afteralsosubtractingthetilesalreadyusedbytheplayer’sandenemies’sprites, which
share the same tile memory even though they’re managed with SPR_addSprite() instead of
VDP_loadTileSet().
Thisdoesn’tchangeanyofthetechniquesalreadycovered—reducingduplicatetileswiththe
TILESET’s ALL mode, reusing mirrored variants instead of drawing new tiles, or falling back
onthemanualspriteloadingfromchapter48ifmorespaceneedstobefreedup—butitdoes
change the arithmetic: in a single-level game, that budget was calculated once and stayed
fixed; in a multi-level game, each level has its own combined foreground-plus-background
budget, and it’s worth checking it level by level as levels are added to the catalog, rather
than assuming that whatever fit in the first one will automatically fit in all the rest.
Review exercises
1. Why is it worth keeping fixed, throughout the project, which hardware palette (PAL0,
PAL1, PAL2, or PAL3) corresponds to the player, the enemies, the level foreground, and
the parallax background, instead of deciding it again for each level?
2. Explain in your own words why the VRAM budget for a level with a foreground and a
parallax background is calculated by adding up the unique tiles of both planes, rather
than evaluating each one separately.
3. In load_level_graphics(), what problem would arise if the second VDP_loadTileSet()
always loaded the background starting from a fixed index, instead of TILE_USER_INDEX
+ level->foreground_tileset->numTile?
412

=== PAGE 419 ===
4. Whyistherenoneedtoexplicitly“erase”thepreviouslevel’stilesinVRAMbeforeload-
ing the next level’s, and what does need to be explicitly freed with MEM_free()?
5. Describe what would change in this chapter’s res_level1.res file if level 1 had been
designedinTiledinsteadofstartingfromasinglecomposedimage,relatingyouranswer
to the TILEMAP resource from chapter 12.
413

=== PAGE 420 ===
Chapter 60 — Transitioning
Between Levels in the Game
Howtoconnectthestatemachinewiththeper-sectionenemycatalogtoadvancelevelswith-
out recompiling, and what happens when an array overflows
Thepreviouschaptersinthispartleftready,separately,twopiecesthatstilldidn’ttalktoeach
other: a minimal state machine, with the current_game_state variable and its LOADING and
RUNNING_LEVELvalues,andacompletecatalogofenemiesbysection,withtheall_enemiesar-
ray,thecurrent_game_sectionvariable,andthecopyEnemyArray()function. Uptothispoint,
changing sections was still a manual procedure: editing the value of current_game_section
byhandinthecode,saving,andrecompiling. Thischapterfinallyconnectsbothpiecessothe
player can advance to the next level by pressing the Start button while the game is running,
without touching the source code again.
Along the way, the chapter shows an almost inevitable design mistake the first time a level
transition is implemented: the sprites from the previous section remain on screen instead of
disappearing. And, to close out, what happens if the game is forced to try to load a section
thatdoesn’texist. BothareexamplesofacategoryofbugsthatanyMegaDriveprogrammer
eventually becomes familiar with: the misuse of arrays and sprite memory.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• The GameStates enum and the current_game_state variable, from the chapter on game
states.
• Theall_enemiescatalog,thecurrent_game_sectionvariable,andthecopyEnemyArray()
function, from the chapter on loading different enemies per level.
• ThecreatePlayer()andcreateEnemies()functionsalreadyworking,capableofplacing
the player and the current section’s enemies on screen.
• Familiarity with joyEvent() to react to pressing the Start button, also covered in the
chapter on game states.
The artistic preparation of each level’s backgrounds, covered in the previous chapter, isn’t
needed yet: this chapter works exclusively on the transition logic, leaving the actual loading
of background graphics for the next chapter.
1. The main loop based on the game state
The first change happens in main.c, where up to now the main loop always called the same
functions on every pass, with no condition. From this chapter on, the body of the loop is
414

=== PAGE 421 ===
organized as a chain of if/else if statements that check the value of current_game_state
beforedecidingwhattodo. IfthestateisRUNNING_LEVEL,theloopprocessesthecontrols,up-
datestheplayerandtheenemies,andrefreshesthesprites,exactlyasithasbeendoinguntil
now. If the state is LOADING, on the other hand, the game needs to do something completely
different: load the data for the new level.
One function is deliberately left out of this branching: SYS_doVBlankProcess(), the call that
synchronizes screen updates with the console’s vertical blank interval. This function needs
to run on every pass of the loop regardless of the game’s state, so it’s left outside of any if,
running unconditionally.
// src/main.c
#include <genesis.h>
#include "levels.h"
#include "player.h"
#include "enemies.h"
int main(bool hard_reset) {
VDP_setScreenWidth320();
JOY_init();
JOY_setEventHandler(joyEvent);
SPR_init();
while (TRUE) {
if (current_game_state == RUNNING_LEVEL) {
handleInput();
managePlayer();
manageEnemies();
SPR_update();
} else if (current_game_state == LOADING) {
levelLoader();
}
// Runs always, regardless of the game's state
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return 0;
}
Before writing the branch for the LOADING state, it’s worth reviewing which existing func-
tions should run only once when the program starts (setting the screen resolution, initializ-
ingthecontroller,initializingSGDK’sspriteengine)andwhichonesshouldberepeatedevery
time a new level is loaded. The former stay where they are, before the main loop; only cre-
atePlayer() and createEnemies() need to run on every level load, and it’s precisely those
two that get reorganized in the next section.
2. levelLoader(): a function that groups level loading to-
gether
2.1. The prototype and the general idea
InsteadofcallingcreatePlayer()andcreateEnemies()separatelyinsidetheLOADINGbranch
ofthemainloop,itmakessensetogrouptheminsideanewfunction,levelLoader(),declared
415

=== PAGE 422 ===
in levels.h. This grouping isn’t just about tidiness: as loading a level grows more complex
(incorporating, in the next chapter, the loading of background graphics, and later music),
levelLoader() will become the only place that needs to be touched to add one more step to
the loading process, instead of having to remember to update the main loop every time.
// inc/levels.h
#ifndef LEVELS_H
#define LEVELS_H
#include <genesis.h>
#include "enemies.h"
#include "player.h"
// Possible game states
enum GameStates {
LOADING,
RUNNING_LEVEL
};
extern u8 current_game_state;
extern u8 current_game_section;
// Groups together all the steps needed to load the current section
// (for now, player and enemies; in the next chapter, backgrounds too)
void levelLoader(void);
#endif // LEVELS_H
Althoughthecompilerdoesn’tflaganyerrorifthey’reomittedatthispoint,it’sworthinclud-
ing enemies.h and player.h inside levels.h, to make explicit that levelLoader() depends
on the functions declared in those files. As the project grows and files reference each other
more often, leaving these dependencies undeclared makes any future reorganization of the
code much more fragile, even though it may compile fine for the moment thanks to other
indirect #includes. The include guard already used in every header of this project ensures
thatthesecross-inclusionsbetweenlevels.h, enemies.h, andplayer.hdon’tendupcausing
any redefinition error.
This is also a good moment to set the initial values of current_game_state and cur-
rent_game_sectioninlevels.c: theformerchangesfromRUNNING_LEVELtoLOADING,because
as soon as the program starts, what’s needed is to load a level, not run it; the latter is left at
0 so the game always starts from the first section.
2.2. The body of levelLoader()
The body of levelLoader(), in levels.c, for now simply calls createPlayer() and createEn-
emies() (the same two functions that used to be called directly from main.c) and, as a final
step, changes current_game_state back to RUNNING_LEVEL. This last step is essential: if lev-
elLoader() never updated the state, the game would keep loading the same level over and
over on every pass of the main loop, never moving on to run it.
// src/levels.c
#include "levels.h"
u8 current_game_state = LOADING;
u8 current_game_section = 0;
416

=== PAGE 423 ===
void levelLoader(void) {
createPlayer();
createEnemies();
// With the level now loaded, the next pass of the main loop
// will run the RUNNING_LEVEL branch
current_game_state = RUNNING_LEVEL;
}
3. Testing the initial load
With levelLoader() now being called from the LOADING branch of the main loop, it’s enough
to compile and test the ROM to verify the full flow: the program starts in the LOADING state,
runs levelLoader() once (which places the player and the section 0 enemies on screen and
changes the state to RUNNING_LEVEL), and from then on each subsequent pass of the loop
runs the RUNNING_LEVEL branch, allowing the player to move around and the enemies to be
observed behaving normally.
4. Changing sections by pressing Start
Withlevelloadingnowautomated, whatremainsisconnectingtheStartbuttontoadvancing
sections. InsidejoyEvent(),inthesameconditionthatalreadychangedcurrent_game_state
to LOADING when Start was pressed, one more line is added: current_game_section++, which
increments the section number by one every time the button is pressed.
// src/controls.c (fragment of joyEvent(), already existing since the
// chapter on game states)
void joyEvent(u16 joy, u16 changed, u16 state) {
if (current_game_state == RUNNING_LEVEL) {
if (changed & state & BUTTON_START) {
current_game_state = LOADING;
current_game_section++;
}
}
}
The next time the main loop enters the LOADING branch, levelLoader() will call createEne-
mies()again,whichinturncallscopyEnemyArray()asitsfirststep;thatfunctionwillreadthe
new value of current_game_section and copy, from all_enemies, the enemies corresponding
to the next section.
Compiling and testing this change, the initial result is encouraging: the first level loads nor-
mally, and pressing Start does advance to the next section, with its own enemies as defined
in all_enemies. However, a slightly closer look reveals a problem.
5. A common bug: sprites that don’t disappear between
levels
Pressing Start several times in a row, the enemies of the new section appear correctly, but
the player and the enemies from the previous section remain visible on screen instead of
417

=== PAGE 424 ===
disappearing, piling up each time a level is advanced. The cause is easy to explain: every
time levelLoader() calls createPlayer() and createEnemies(), these functions allocate new
spritesviaSPR_addSprite(), butatnopointisSGDK’sspriteenginetoldtoreleasetheprevi-
ous section’s sprites before creating the new ones.
Figure 154: Sprites piling up on screen after pressing Start several times
Thespritesfromprevioussectionsremainonscreentogetherwiththoseofthecurrentsection,
instead of being replaced.
Beyond the anecdotal sight of dozens of overlapping sprites on screen before the problem is
noticedorthesystemcrashes,thisbugillustratesageneralprinciplevalidinalmostanysprite
engine: allocatingaresource(inthiscase,ahardwaresprite)withoutreleasingtheprevious
one will sooner or later exhaust that resource, whether it’s memory, sprite identifiers, or any
other finite limit of the system.
6. The fix: SPR_reset()
SGDKoffersafunctiondesignedexactlyforthisscenario: SPR_reset(),whichreleasesevery
sprite allocated so far along with the resources associated with them. The fix consists of
callingSPR_reset()asthefirststepinsidelevelLoader(),beforeanythingelse,sothatevery
level load starts from a clean state, with no leftover sprites from the previous section:
// src/levels.c
#include "levels.h"
u8 current_game_state = LOADING;
u8 current_game_section = 0;
void levelLoader(void) {
// Releases every sprite allocated so far —the player and the
418

=== PAGE 425 ===
// enemies from the previous section— before creating the
// ones for the new section
SPR_reset();
createPlayer();
createEnemies();
current_game_state = RUNNING_LEVEL;
}
After recompiling with this change, the problem disappears completely: the player and the
enemiesfromeachprevioussectionareremovedfromthescreentheinstantthenextsection
is loaded, and only the sprites belonging to the current section remain visible.
SPR_reset() releases absolutely every sprite allocated so far, without distinguishing what
category they belong to. As long as the only thing on screen is the player and the enemies,
thisisexactlywhat’sneeded;butifinafuturechapterthegameaddsalifecounterorascore
iconthatshouldsurvivealeveltransition,thatspritewouldalsodisappearwhenSPR_reset()
iscalledinsidelevelLoader(),anditwouldneedtoberecreatedrightthere,orthequestion
of which sprites get released and which don’t would need to be rethought.
Lookfortheexistingfunctionfirst. Anyfunctioninanengineorframeworkthat
allocates a resource is usually accompanied by an equivalent function to release it.
Faced with a resource-accumulation bug like the one in this section, it’s worth ask-
ing first: does the framework being used already have a function designed exactly
forthisproblem? InSGDK,theanswerisalmostalwaysyes,andlookingitupinthe
documentation usually saves a lot of time compared to trying to solve the problem
by hand—for example, keeping a custom array of pointers to Sprite just to be able
to loop through it and call SPR_releaseSprite() sprite by sprite.
7. A deliberate crash: what happens when the level array
overflows
To close out the chapter, a question asked with a bit of mischief: what happens if Start is
pressed more times than there are sections defined in all_enemies? That catalog was de-
clared with capacity for ten sections (indices 0 through 9), so pressing Start eleven times
brings current_game_section to the value 10, an index that falls outside the array’s valid
bounds.
The result, the first time the array overflows by a single position, isn’t an immediate crash:
a single enemy appears on screen, with data that clearly doesn’t correspond to any section
designed on purpose. This happens because index 10 falls right into the memory contiguous
to all_enemies, which at that moment happens to contain some data that can be interpreted
as a valid enemy. Continuing to press Start and overflowing the array by one more position,
the program finally crashes with an address error message.
Thisiswhattheaddresserrorproducedbythe68000lookslikewhenreadingmemoryoutside
the bounds of all_enemies.
An address error of this kind is how the Mega Drive, more precisely its Motorola 68000 pro-
cessor, reacts when the program tries to access a memory address in a way the hardware
doesn’tallow, somethingthathappensfrequentlywhenanarrayoverflowsandendsupread-
ing memory that doesn’t belong to that array.
It’s tempting to think that an immediate, loud crash is the worst possible outcome for a bug
419

=== PAGE 426 ===
Figure 155: Emulator address error when overflowing the all_enemies array
like this, but it’s worth considering the opposite argument: the intermediate result (a single
enemywithcorrupteddata,withnoerrormessageatall)isactuallymoredangerous,because
itinviteslookingforthecauseoftheprobleminthewrongplace—theAIlogic,forinstance—
instead of correctly suspecting an array overflow. An immediate, explicit crash, even though
it’s alarming the first time it’s seen, unambiguously signals that something was written or
readoutsidethememoryboundsitwassupposedtostaywithin,narrowingdownconsiderably
where to look for the bug.
This chapter closes without fixing the ten-section limit: this is a problem that naturally gets
resolvedasthegame’sdevelopmentprogressesanddefinesitsactualnumberoflevels,andit
doesn’t warrant further concern for now. It is worth remembering this behavior, though, the
next time a strange, inconsistent bug shows up in a project of your own: before suspecting
more complex logic, it’s worth ruling out an array overflow first.
Review exercises
1. Explain why SYS_doVBlankProcess() is deliberately left out of the if/else if chain that
distinguishes the game states, unlike handleInput() or manageEnemies().
2. Why is it essential that levelLoader() change current_game_state to RUNNING_LEVEL as
its last step? What would happen if that line were left out by mistake?
3. Explaintheexactcauseofthebugwherespritesfromprevioussectionsremainedvisible
when transitioning between sections, and describe the fix that was applied.
4. Why doesn’t the first overflow of the all_enemies array (reaching index 10) produce an
immediate crash, while the second overflow does?
5. If you had to increase the game’s level capacity from 10 to 20 sections, what changes
would need to be made, at minimum, to the code described in this chapter and in the
chapter on loading enemies per level?
420

=== PAGE 427 ===
Chapter 61 — Loading a New
Level’s Graphics
ALevelstruct,alevelcatalog,andtheactualloadingofbackground,foreground,andpalette
into VRAM via DMA, respecting the limits covered in Part VIII
The previous chapter left the full skeleton of a level transition working: pressing Start in-
crementscurrent_game_section,triggerstheLOADINGstate,andlevelLoader()takescareof
returning the game to the RUNNING_LEVEL state. However, that skeleton still doesn’t move a
single tile onto the screen: no matter what section the player is in, the background shown is
always the same, because levelLoader() currently only calls createPlayer() and createEn-
emies(). This chapter closes that loop, finally connecting current_game_section with the
actual loading of each level’s backgrounds, foregrounds, and palettes, and along the way
answers a question left pending since Part VIII: what does it actually mean, in practice, to
upload the complete graphics of a new level to VRAM without the transition showing up as a
long pause or visual corruption?
The result isn’t just showing different graphics per section: it’s doing so cleanly, with the
correct palettes from the very first visible frame, and with a fade transition that hides any
flicker while the new data travels to VRAM. Along the way, the same kind of array-overflow
crash that already showed up with the enemy catalog reappears, now applied to the level
catalog.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have on hand:
• Thestatemachine(current_game_state,withitsLOADINGandRUNNING_LEVELvalues)and
the current_game_section variable, along with levelLoader() and SPR_reset(), as they
were left in the chapter on level transitions.
• TheEnemystructandtheall_enemiescatalogasadirectreference: thischapter’sLevel
struct follows the same design pattern, including the same kind of array-overflow crash
if you advance past the catalog’s limit.
• An understanding of the BG_A/BG_B planes, VDP_drawImageEx(), and TILE_ATTR_FULL(),
andofwhyit’sworthsplittingalevelintobackgroundandforegroundtoenableparallax
scrolling, as explained in the chapter on preparing level graphics.
• Familiarity with managing multiple palettes and with PAL_fadeIn()/PAL_fadeOut(), cov-
ered in the chapter dedicated to palette fades.
• The DMA mechanism explained in depth in chapter 44 (DMA_doDma(), DMA_queueDma(),
the transfer queue, and its per-vblank capacity limits) and the split of VRAM between
background and sprites covered in chapter 45 (TILE_USER_INDEX, SPR_initEx()), since
thischapterrevisitsbothtopicsandappliesthemtoaconcretecase: loadingafulllevel.
421

=== PAGE 428 ===
• A notion of how rescomp generates a header file from a .res file, as explained in the
chapter dedicated to the resource compiler.
1. A level’s graphic resources: background, foreground,
and a separate palette
Each level in the game is made up of two independent images —a background and a
foreground— prepared following the artistic criteria already explained in the chapter on
preparing level graphics: separating both layers is precisely what enables parallax scrolling
between them later on. A third, much smaller image is added to those two, whose sole
purpose is to store color information: the screen’s overall background color and the four
systempalettes(PAL0throughPAL3)infull,sixty-fourcolorsintotal. Inthisproject,PAL0and
PAL1 are reserved for the level’s background and foreground, PAL2 for enemies, and PAL3 for
the player and the HUD.
Storing the palette as a separate resource, instead of letting each image carry its own, has
a concrete advantage: it allows combining the same background with different foregrounds
that use different palettes for PAL1, which will come in handy the day a single scene needs
lighting or section variants. The three resources for each level are declared using the same
.res file mechanism already used in previous chapters for sprites and backgrounds:
// res_levels.res
IMAGE level1_palette "levels/level1_palette.png" NONE
IMAGE level1_background "levels/level1_background.png" BEST ALL
TILESET level1_fg_tileset "levels/level1_foreground.png" BEST ALL
MAP level1_fg_map "levels/level1_foreground.png" level1_fg_tileset BEST 0
IMAGE level2_palette "levels/level2_palette.png" NONE
IMAGE level2_background "levels/level2_background.png" BEST ALL
TILESET level2_fg_tileset "levels/level2_foreground.png" BEST ALL
MAP level2_fg_map "levels/level2_foreground.png" level2_fg_tileset BEST 0
IMAGE level3_palette "levels/level3_palette.png" NONE
IMAGE level3_background "levels/level3_background.png" BEST ALL
TILESET level3_fg_tileset "levels/level3_foreground.png" BEST ALL
MAP level3_fg_map "levels/level3_foreground.png" level3_fg_tileset BEST 0
Thelevel1_paletteresourceusestheNONEcompressionmodebecauseit’satinyimage: com-
pressingitprovidesnorealsavingsandonlyaddsanunnecessarydecompressionstep. When
compiled,rescompgeneratesres_levels.hfollowingthesamelogicalreadyseenforanyother
resource: each name becomes available as a read-only global variable, ready to be included
from levels.c.
2. A Level struct to describe each section of the game
2.1. Defining struct Level
WiththeresourcesalreadyuploadedtotheROM,thenextstepistodescribeeachlevelofthe
game with a struct, using exactly the same criteria already applied to enemies: gathering, in
a single place, all the information a level needs in order to be displayed on screen.
422

=== PAGE 429 ===
// levels.h
#pragma once
#include <genesis.h>
#include "res_levels.h"
// The three level configurations planned for this project.
// For now only LEVEL_PARALLAX is implemented; the other two are
// declared in advance so the struct and the catalog don't need to
// be redesigned the day they get implemented.
typedef enum {
LEVEL_PARALLAX, // independent background and foreground, with parallax
↪ scroll
LEVEL_DOUBLE_MAP, // two tile maps at different speeds (indoor scenes)
LEVEL_STATIC // a single static image with a collision map, no scroll of
↪ its own
} LevelType;
typedef struct {
LevelType type;
const Image* palette; // 8x8 image used only to extract the
↪ level's 64 colors
const Image* background; // level background, drawn on BG_B
const TileSet* foreground_tileset; // unique foreground tiles
const MapDefinition* foreground_map;
// The following fields aren't used yet in this chapter: they're
// declared from the start so the struct -and therefore every entry
// already written into the catalog- doesn't need to change the day
// the camera and level collision specific to this project get
// implemented (see the general chapters on camera and collision
// in Parts III and VII).
u16 width;
u16 height;
const u8* collision_map;
s16 player_start_x;
s16 player_start_y;
} Level;
#define LEVEL_CAPACITY 10
extern const Level all_levels[LEVEL_CAPACITY];
// VRAM position currently being written to during loading
extern u16 vram_index;
// The foreground map, already prepared and ready to display on screen
extern Map* fg_map_def;
// Intermediate copy of the level's 64 colors, used as the source for the fade-in
extern u16 palette_full[64];
void levelLoader(void);
void screenResetManager(void);
Several of Level’s fields are pointers (Image*, TileSet*, MapDefinition*), which
423

=== PAGE 430 ===
requireswritingthecorrespondingasteriskwhendeclaringeachfield. Leavingout
theasteriskbymistakeisaneasytypotomake,onethecompilerdoesn’talwaysflag
right away with a clear message; instead, it can show up later as strange behavior
whenreadingthosefields. It’sworthcarefullycheckingthesyntaxofeverypointer
field when writing a struct like this one.
vram_index,fg_map_def,andpalette_fullarethreesupportvariablesneededbytheloading
process in the next section: vram_index tracks the VRAM position currently being written to;
fg_map_def holds the pointer to the foreground map returned by MAP_create(), needed later
tofreeit;andpalette_fullservesasanintermediatestepforcopyingalevel’spalettebefore
applying a fade-in to it.
2.2. The all_levels catalog
With the struct already defined, an array of ten elements of type Level, all_levels, is de-
clared, using the same provisional sizing criteria already used for all_enemies. The actual
content is written in levels.c, marked as const so it’s stored in ROM rather than occupying
RAM, since each level’s configuration doesn’t change during gameplay:
// levels.c
#include "levels.h"
#include "player.h"
#include "enemies.h"
u8 current_game_section = 0;
u16 vram_index;
Map* fg_map_def;
u16 palette_full[64];
const Level all_levels[LEVEL_CAPACITY] = {
{ LEVEL_PARALLAX, &level1_palette, &level1_background, &level1_fg_tileset,
↪ &level1_fg_map, 0, 0, NULL, 0, 0 },
{ LEVEL_PARALLAX, &level2_palette, &level2_background, &level2_fg_tileset,
↪ &level2_fg_map, 0, 0, NULL, 0, 0 },
{ LEVEL_PARALLAX, &level3_palette, &level3_background, &level3_fg_tileset,
↪ &level3_fg_map, 0, 0, NULL, 0, 0 },
{ LEVEL_PARALLAX, &level1_palette, &level1_background, &level1_fg_tileset,
↪ &level1_fg_map, 0, 0, NULL, 0, 0 },
{ LEVEL_PARALLAX, &level2_palette, &level2_background, &level2_fg_tileset,
↪ &level2_fg_map, 0, 0, NULL, 0, 0 },
{ LEVEL_PARALLAX, &level3_palette, &level3_background, &level3_fg_tileset,
↪ &level3_fg_map, 0, 0, NULL, 0, 0 },
{ LEVEL_PARALLAX, &level1_palette, &level1_background, &level1_fg_tileset,
↪ &level1_fg_map, 0, 0, NULL, 0, 0 },
{ LEVEL_PARALLAX, &level2_palette, &level2_background, &level2_fg_tileset,
↪ &level2_fg_map, 0, 0, NULL, 0, 0 },
{ LEVEL_PARALLAX, &level3_palette, &level3_background, &level3_fg_tileset,
↪ &level3_fg_map, 0, 0, NULL, 0, 0 },
{ LEVEL_PARALLAX, &level1_palette, &level1_background, &level1_fg_tileset,
↪ &level1_fg_map, 0, 0, NULL, 0, 0 },
};
For testing purposes, the catalog alternates between three different pre-prepared levels, so
the sections can be told apart at a glance while advancing with Start. Each entry’s last six
fields are placeholder values, not used yet, awaiting the camera and level collision.
424

=== PAGE 431 ===
Just like with all_enemies, all_levels also has a fixed capacity of ten entries. Ad-
vancingpastthatlimit—bypressingStarteleventimesinarow,forexample—pro-
duces exactly the same kind of array-overflow crash (address error) already seen
with the enemy catalog: the program tries to read an entry of all_levels that’s
outsideitsdeclaredbounds. Thecauseandthefixareidenticaltothatearliercase,
so they aren’t repeated in detail here; for now, it’s simply best not to exceed the
ten defined sections.
3. Loading the graphics in levelLoader()
With the catalog already complete, the loading process is added inside levelLoader(). The
procedure starts by positioning vram_index at the beginning of the index reserved for user
tiles(TILE_USER_INDEX),drawsthecurrentsection’sbackgroundwithVDP_drawImageEx(),ad-
vances vram_index by the number of tiles that background occupied, uploads the foreground
tileset with VDP_loadTileSet() starting from that new position, and finally builds the fore-
ground map with MAP_create() and scrolls it with MAP_scrollTo():
void levelLoader(void) {
const Level* level = &all_levels[current_game_section];
vram_index = TILE_USER_INDEX;
VDP_drawImageEx(BG_B, level->background,
TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, vram_index), 0, 0, FALSE, DMA);
vram_index += level->background->tileset->numTile;
VDP_loadTileSet(level->foreground_tileset, vram_index, DMA);
fg_map_def = MAP_create(level->foreground_map, BG_A,
TILE_ATTR_FULL(PAL1, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, vram_index));
MAP_scrollTo(fg_map_def, 300, 0);
createPlayer();
createEnemies();
current_game_state = RUNNING_LEVEL;
}
Throughout this sequence, vram_index plays the same role already seen in the chapter on
backgrounds: everygraphicresourceuploadedtoVRAMneedstoknowwhatpositiontostart
writing from, and that position depends on how much space the resources uploaded earlier
in that same load already took up. Keeping track in a single variable, instead of computing
separate offsets on each call, is what lets the same block of code work unchanged no matter
which level is being loaded at any given moment.
Compiling and testing the result at this point, the level’s graphics do show up on screen,
confirming that the loading mechanism works, though with a pending visual problem: since
no level-specific palette has been loaded yet, PAL0 shows up as white by default and PAL1 as
red, leaving some areas of the foreground visibly different from the rest.
The level’s graphics are already on screen, but without their own palette: PAL0 shows up
white and PAL1 red by default.
425

=== PAGE 432 ===
Figure 156: Level with PAL0 and PAL1 not yet loaded
4. Why the colors come out wrong: manual palettes versus
per-level palettes
If you open the emulator’s palette debugging screen at this point, PAL2 and PAL3 —the en-
emy’s and the player’s palettes— show up with their correct colors, while PAL0 and PAL1
remain white and red. The reason is that createPlayer() and createEnemies() still call
PAL_setPalette() manually to set their own palettes, something that made sense before a
level system existed, but which now conflicts with the idea of loading all of a level’s palettes
in a centralized way.
The fix is to remove those manual calls to PAL_setPalette() from both createPlayer() and
createEnemies(). The goal is for the game’s four palettes to be loaded from a single, cen-
tralized place inside levelLoader(), instead of each function responsible for creating an on-
screen element managing its own palette separately.
The first step of that centralization is copying the information from the current level’s small
palette image —accessible as all_levels[current_game_section].palette->data— into the
already-declared palette_full array, using memcpy() to copy all 64 colors in one go:
memcpy(palette_full, level->palette->data, sizeof(palette_full));
With the colors already copied, the final step is to call PAL_fadeIn() at the end of level-
Loader(), passing it palette_full as the color source and a short duration, measured in
frames:
PAL_fadeIn(0, 63, palette_full, 15, FALSE);
The 0, 63 range covers all four palettes at once, since palette_full carries the 64 colors in
thesameordertheyliveininCRAM.Afterrecompiling,thelevelfinallyshowsupwithitsreal
colors from the very first visible instant on screen.
426

=== PAGE 433 ===
5. Clean transitions: fade-out and memory release
With the fade-in already working, one detail still remains unresolved: when switching levels,
theplayerbrieflygetstoseehalf-loadedtileswhilethenewdataisbeingcopiedtoVRAM.The
fixistoaddafade-out, PAL_fadeOut(), atthestartoftheloadingprocess, sothescreengoes
black before the new graphic data starts being written, and the new level is only revealed
once everything is ready.
There’s also a loose end of a different nature: every time MAP_create() is called to generate
fg_map_def, SGDK allocates dynamic memory for that structure. If that memory is never
freed before preparing the next level’s map, every level transition leaves behind allocated
memory that’s no longer used and never reclaimed —something that isn’t noticeable today
because the game is small, but that would eventually cause an out-of-memory crash as the
gamegrows. ThefixistocallMEM_free(fg_map_def)beforecallingMAP_create()againwhen
loading the next level.
These three cleanup tasks —fade-out, sprite reset, and memory release— are grouped into
a separate function, screenResetManager(), whose sole purpose is to leave the screen and
memory in a clean state before loading any new level:
// levels.c
void screenResetManager(void) {
PAL_fadeOut(0, 63, 10, FALSE);
SPR_reset();
if (fg_map_def != NULL) {
MEM_free(fg_map_def);
fg_map_def = NULL;
}
// Leaves all four palettes black between one fade and the next,
// to rule out any chance of a leftover color from the previous
// level bleeding through visually while the new data is loading
PAL_setColors(0, palette_black, 64, DMA);
}
screenResetManager()isn’tcalledfromlevelLoader(),butfromcontrols.c,insidethesame
condition that already increments current_game_section and changes current_game_state
to LOADING when Start is pressed:
// controls.c (joyEvent excerpt)
if (changed & buttons & BUTTON_START) {
screenResetManager();
current_game_section++;
current_game_state = LOADING;
}
Thereasonisvisualsynchronization: it’sbetterforthescreentostartfadingtoblackthevery
instant the player presses Start, rather than on the frame in which levelLoader() actually
runs, which could be slightly delayed depending on the rest of the main loop.
427

=== PAGE 434 ===
6. From a blocking transfer to the DMA queue
Everything above already leaves the level-change cycle working end to end, but it’s
worth taking a closer look at what’s happening under the hood of VDP_drawImageEx() and
VDP_loadTileSet()whenuploadingthegraphics,becausethisisexactlythescenariochapter
44 left pending for this point in the manual.
Both VDP_drawImageEx(..., DMA) and VDP_loadTileSet(..., DMA) trigger, underneath, an
immediate, blocking transfer equivalent to DMA_doDma(): the 68000 is halted until the VDP
finishescopyingthetiles. InlevelLoader()thisisn’taproblem,becauseithappensonlyonce
per transition and with the screen already black thanks to screenResetManager(): there’s
nothing on screen depending on the CPU continuing to run at that exact instant. The real
cost isn’t visual, it’s about time: while the DMA is busy copying a level’s tiles, no other game
calculation moves forward, and since this load doesn’t necessarily happen during vblank —
it could start in the middle of a frame’s active drawing, depending on exactly when level-
Loader()runswithinthemainloop—thetransferalsorunsatthereducedspeedthatchapter
44 described for that period.
For a level with a modest background and foreground, a few thousand bytes in total, this
speed difference isn’t noticeable. The problem shows up with the LEVEL_DOUBLE_MAP level
type anticipated in the enum: an indoor scene with two independent tile maps can easily
accumulatemoreuniquetilesthanasinglevblankisabletomove,basedonthefigureexposed
by DMA_getMaxTransferSize(). Forcing that amount of data through DMA_doDma() all at once
doesn’t produce any error, but it does produce a proportionally longer CPU stall, potentially
spilling partly into the active drawing of the next frame, with the speed penalty that implies.
The alternative, as laid out in chapter 44, is to split the load across several frames using the
DMA queue instead of an immediate transfer, checking before each chunk how much budget
remains available in the current frame with DMA_canQueue():
// Uploads a full TileSet to VRAM in chunks that respect a single
// vblank's transfer limit, instead of one blocking call.
// Meant for large tilesets (for example, a LEVEL_DOUBLE_MAP), where
// a single DMA_doDma() call might not comfortably fit within one frame.
static void loadTileSetFractioned(const TileSet* tileset, u16 index) {
u16 words_left = tileset->numTile * 16; // 16 words (32 bytes) per tile
u16 words_sent = 0;
u16 dest = index * 32;
while (words_left > 0) {
u16 max_chunk = DMA_getMaxTransferSize();
u16 chunk = (words_left < max_chunk) ? words_left : max_chunk;
// If the chunk doesn't fit within the current frame's remaining
// budget, wait for the next vblank before trying again
while (!DMA_canQueue(chunk)) {
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
DMA_queueDma(DMA_VRAM, (u8*) tileset->tiles + words_sent * 2, dest, chunk,
↪ 2);
words_sent += chunk;
words_left -= chunk;
dest += chunk * 2;
428

=== PAGE 435 ===
// Lets this chunk be processed on the next vblank before
// queuing up the next one
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
}
Replacing the call to VDP_loadTileSet(level->foreground_tileset, vram_index, DMA) with
loadTileSetFractioned(level->foreground_tileset, vram_index) spreads the same total
amountofdataacrossseveralvblanksinsteadofjustone,withoutthescreen—alreadyblack
thanks to screenResetManager()— showing any hint that the load is happening in several
steps. For this chapter’s LEVEL_PARALLAX levels, whose data volume is modest, the blocking
versionremainsperfectlyreasonable; thefractionedversionisthetooltoreachforthedaya
heavierleveltyperequiresit,ratherthananoptimizationthatneedstobeappliedacrossthe
board as a matter of course.
Before reaching that point, though, it’s worth measuring: chapter 45 already showed how to
count unique tiles with a graphics editor’s tileset tool and how to split the available VRAM
between background and sprites with SPR_initEx(). Applying that same criteria here, it’s
useful to verify at runtime that no level in the catalog exceeds the tile budget the project
reserved for the combined background and foreground:
#define LEVEL_TILE_BUDGET 1000 // tiles available for background + foreground,
↪ leaving the rest to SPR_initEx()
u16 tiles_needed = level->background->tileset->numTile +
↪ level->foreground_tileset->numTile;
if (tiles_needed > LEVEL_TILE_BUDGET) {
KLog_U1("Level exceeds VRAM budget, tiles needed: ", tiles_needed);
}
This check doesn’t replace the earlier measurement with the graphics editor already ex-
plained in chapter 45; it’s more of a safety net for catching, in the emulator during devel-
opment, a level whose art grew beyond what was planned before the problem shows up as
visual corruption on screen.
Review exercises
1. Explainwhyalevel’spaletteinformationisstoredinaseparateresourceofjust64colors,
instead of being included directly within the background or foreground image.
2. Describe the role of vram_index inside levelLoader(): why is it necessary to increment
it after drawing the background, and what would happen if it weren’t?
3. Why did PAL2 and PAL3 show their correct colors from the start, while PAL0 and PAL1
showed up as white and red by default, before the changes in section 4?
4. VDP_drawImageEx() and VDP_loadTileSet() use, in this chapter, an immediate DMA
transfer (DMA) instead of a queue. Explain under what condition that choice stops being
harmless, and what alternative SGDK offers for that case.
5. Explain what problem MEM_free(fg_map_def) solves, why it makes sense to group it to-
getherwithPAL_fadeOut()andSPR_reset()insidescreenResetManager(),andwhythat
function is called from joyEvent() in controls.c instead of from the start of level-
Loader().
429

=== PAGE 436 ===
Chapter 62 — Wrapping Up and
Extending the Project
A look back at what was built throughout this part, and a guide to continuing on toward the
HUD, sound, and save games
The previous twelve chapters built, piece by piece, a small functional beat ’em up: a player
and several types of permanent enemies defined in a reusable catalog, a per-enemy artificial
intelligenceresolvedwithfunctionpointers,astatemachinethatdistinguishesbetweenplay-
ingandloadingalevel,andasectiontransitionthatreplacesthebackground,theforeground,
and the entire palette without the loading being noticeable as a long pause. This is a good
moment to stop, look at the project as a whole, and place it within the limits it has today,
before continuing to add new layers.
Unlike the chapter that closes each of the other parts of this manual, this one does not in-
troduce a new technical topic. Its purpose is different: to review how the pieces of this part
fit together, to point out precisely what is still missing for the project to feel like a complete
game,andtolayoutthemostdirectpathfromwhathasalreadybeenbuilttowardthetopics
that still lie ahead in this manual.
1. The project as it stands
It’s worth reconstructing, in a single picture, the full journey of this part. It all started
by organizing the VDP planes to clearly separate the game background from the character
sprites,andbysplittingthatgrowingcodebaseintoitsownheaderfiles(player.h,enemies.h,
levels.h, controls.h) so that each piece of the project lives in its own file without losing
the ability to communicate with the others. On that foundation, enemies went from being
loose variables to an array, and from an array to a full struct Enemy, indexed through an
enum EnemyTypes instead of bare numbers with no meaning. A catalog of permanent types
(all_enemy_types) centralized each enemy’s fixed characteristics — maximum health, speed,
sprite, palette — and a function pointer inside that same struct allowed each enemy type to
haveitsownbehaviorwithoutasinglegiantblockofrepeatedif/elsestatementsinthemain
loop.
Inparallel,astatevariablebackedbyanenum GameStatesgavethegametheabilitytodistin-
guishbetweenplayingandloadinganewlevel,blockingplayercontrolduringthetransition;
andacatalogoflevelspersection,withitsownstructanditsownenum,finishedconnecting
that state machine to the actual loading of backgrounds, foregrounds, and palettes for each
section, using the DMA mechanism covered in depth in Part VIII. The result is a player who
moves,enemieswiththeirownbehaviorsthatappeardependingonthesection,andabutton
that advances from one section to the next, loading different graphics each time.
Put another way: the project in this part is not a finished game, but the backbone of one. It
430

=== PAGE 437 ===
hasarchitecture,ithasdataorganizedinascalableway,andithasthefulllevel-loadingcycle
working end to end. What it still lacks is nearly everything a player would expect to see on
screen beyond the character and the enemies: there’s no health bar that drops when hit, no
score, no sound, and no way to save progress between one play session and the next.
2. What’s missing, and why it’s deliberately left open
Closing this part with a complete game — with a main menu, a HUD, a scoring system, and
win/lose conditions — would be possible, but it would come at a pedagogical cost: it would
forceseveraltopicsthatdeservetheirownspacetobeintroducedallatonce,mixedtogether
inasingleclosingchapter. That’swhytheprojectinthispartisdeliberatelyleftopen,unlike
the project in Part XI, which does go through its entire pipeline all the way to a complete,
playable game.
Three concrete extensions stand out as the most natural way to continue from here, and all
three rely purely and exclusively on tools this manual has already covered:
A HUD with lives and score. Displaying the player’s health and a point counter on screen
doesn’t require any new technique: it’s enough to reserve a strip of the BG_A or BG_B plane
— as explained in the chapter on VDP planes that opened this part — and update it with
VDP_drawText() whenever either value changes, with the same care already noted in Part
I about reserving one extra character in the destination string for negative numbers. The
trickiestpointofaHUDwithinthisparticularprojectisthatlevelLoader()callsSPR_reset()
on every level transition, freeing all sprites reserved up to that point; if the HUD is ever
implemented with sprites instead of text on a background plane, those sprites would need to
be recreated inside levelLoader() after the SPR_reset() call, or SPR_reset() would need to
be replaced with a more selective release that distinguishes the HUD’s sprites from those of
the player and the enemies.
Sound. The project in this part didn’t play a single sound effect or a single music track,
but everything needed to do so was already covered in Part V: loading a sound effect with
rescompandtriggeringitwithSND_startPlay_PCM()orthecorrespondingdriverwhenahitis
received, or changing the background music with each level transition inside levelLoader(),
following the same pattern already used there to load new backgrounds and palettes.
Savingthegame. Neitherthisprojectnoranyearlierchapterhasyettouchedonpreserving
the player’s progress between console power cycles. That topic is developed later in this
manual,inPartX,andit’sthenaturalcomplementtoalevelcataloglikeall_levels: without
saving, current_game_section always resets to zero when the console restarts; with saving,
thatsamevaluecouldbereadfromnon-volatilememoryassoonastheprogramstarts,picking
the player back up exactly where they had left off.
Noneofthethreeextensionsrequiresredesigningwhathasalreadybeenbuilt. Allthreerely
onthesamearchitectureofstructs,enums,andenum-indexedcatalogsthatranthroughthis
entire part, which is, in the end, the most important lesson the project leaves behind: once
a game’s data is well organized — instead of scattered across loose variables — adding new
functionality rarely means rewriting what already works.
3. A pattern that keeps repeating: why it’s worth recogniz-
ing
Beforeclosing,there’sapatternthatrepeatedatleastthreetimesthroughoutthispart,under
adifferentnameeachtime: acatalogoffixeddata,representedasaconstantarrayofstructs,
indexedbyanenum,andqueriedfromcoderatherthanhardcodedbyhand. Theenemy-type
431

=== PAGE 438 ===
catalog(all_enemy_types),theper-sectionenemycatalog(all_enemies),andthelevelcatalog
(all_levels) are three applications of the same pattern to three different problems.
Recognizing this pattern as a general tool, rather than a one-off solution tied to enemies or
levels, is useful because it will resurface in whatever form a game needs to describe “sev-
eral things of the same kind, with the same characteristics but different values”: collectible
objects, projectile types, a character’s dialogue lines, difficulty settings. The same mold —
struct, enum, constant array, an access function that validates the index before using it —
serves all of those cases, with the same precaution noted in the chapter on level transitions:
afixed-sizearraycanalwaysoverflowiftheindextraversingitisn’tvalidatedagainstitsactual
bound.
Review exercises
1. Explain,inyourownwords,whytheprojectinthispartisconsidered“abackbone”rather
than “a finished game.” What concrete elements does it lack to feel like a complete
game?
2. Describe the design pattern that repeats across all_enemy_types, all_enemies, and
all_levels: what do the three catalogs have in common, beyond the specific data each
one stores?
3. IfyouhadtoaddaHUDwithsprites(insteadoftextoverabackgroundplane)todisplay
health icons, what concrete conflict would you need to resolve with the levelLoader()
function as it stood at the end of the previous chapter?
4. Why does saving a game require non-volatile memory, and why isn’t an ordinary C
variable like current_game_section enough to preserve that value between one console
power-on and the next?
5. Think of a game feature that wasn’t mentioned in this chapter (for example, collectible
objects or different weapons) and describe, in broad strokes, how you would apply the
struct/enum/constant-array catalog pattern to represent it.
432

=== PAGE 439 ===
Chapter 63 — HInterrupts and
Raster Effects
The VDP’s horizontal interrupt, SYS_setHIntCallback(), and differential scroll by screen
bands
ThischapteropensPartXofthemanual,devotedtoadvancedtopicsthatdidn’tfitcomfortably
into the previous parts: they aren’t a direct continuation of a topic already underway, but
rather specific tools worth knowing once the rest of the foundation — the VDP, DMA, the
general structure of an SGDK project — is already settled. The first of these tools is the
horizontal interrupt, or HInterrupt (also called HInt, or in English-language documentation,
horizontal interrupt).
Uptothispoint,anychangemadetotheVDP—movingaplane,changingapalette,updating
a tile — has always happened at one of two possible moments: during the main loop, while
the screen has already been drawn and what’s showing is still the previous frame, or during
the vertical blank (vblank), the interval between when one frame finishes drawing and the
next one begins, which is what SYS_doVBlankProcess() targets. The HInterrupt adds a third,
muchfiner-grainedpossibility: reactinginthemiddleofthedrawingofasingleframe,exactly
whentheVDP’sscanbeamfinishesonelineofvideoandisabouttostartthenext. Thatmakes
it possible to change the VDP’s state — the background color, a plane’s horizontal offset, in
theory almost any register — at a precise point on the screen, and it’s the basis for a classic
familyofeffectsgenericallyknownasrastereffects: waterthatrippleswithadifferentscroll
offset on each horizontal strip, a starry sky that scrolls at a different speed than the ground,
a split screen where a HUD area stays fixed while the rest keeps scrolling.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, you should be comfortable with:
• UnderstandingoftheVDP,itsBG_A/BG_Bplanes,andthethreegranularitiesofhorizontal
scroll(HSCROLL_PLANE,HSCROLL_TILE,HSCROLL_LINE),introducedinchapter2andputinto
code in chapters 9 and 17.
• Having worked with VDP_setScrollingMode() and VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile(),
from chapter 17, since this chapter extends the same idea to the finest granularity, per
line.
• The general structure of an SGDK program, with its main loop organized around
SYS_doVBlankProcess().
• Ideally, having read chapter 44 on DMA, because one of this chapter’s precautions is
precisely which transfer mechanisms cannot be used inside an HInterrupt.
433

=== PAGE 440 ===
1. What a horizontal interrupt is at the hardware level
The Mega Drive’s VDP draws the screen line by line, top to bottom, sweeping each line from
left to right before moving to the next. That process is exactly the same mechanism, in-
herited from analog television, that makes the very concept of vblank possible: when the
scan reaches the last visible line and has to return to the top for the next frame, there’s
an interval with nothing to draw, and that’s where the vertical interrupt (VInt) that triggers
SYS_doVBlankProcess() occurs.
Thehorizontalinterruptisthesameidea,butappliedtoeachindividuallineinsteadoftoeach
complete frame. The VDP has an internal line counter and a dedicated register — register
0x0A,intheVDP’sinternalregisternumbering—thatspecifieshowmanylinesshouldelapse
between interrupt triggers. SGDK exposes that counter with:
void VDP_setHIntCounter(u8 value);
The value loaded there isn’t “every how many lines,” but “how many lines to wait before the
first one”: with value = 0 the interrupt fires on every line, and in general, loading N makes
the HInterrupt occur every N + 1 scan lines. That counter reloads itself automatically after
each trigger, so once configured it keeps producing interrupts at regular intervals without
the program having to reprogram it line by line.
The interrupt itself has to be enabled separately, with:
void VDP_setHInterrupt(bool value);
VDP_setHInterrupt(TRUE) enables the trigger; VDP_setHInterrupt(FALSE) turns it off
completely, without touching the counter value (which stays saved for the next time it’s
re-enabled). An important detail for understanding where it makes sense to use this mech-
anism: the HInterrupt fires while the VDP is scanning through the screen’s active drawing
area, line by line; when it reaches the end of the frame, it’s the vertical interrupt that takes
over during the vblank, not the horizontal one. This is precisely what makes the HInterrupt
useful for this chapter: it provides a hook point exactly where the VInt doesn’t reach, in the
middle of the frame’s own drawing, rather than only before or after it.
A necessary clarification: it’s not magic, it’s real time. The CPU doesn’t
“pause” the VDP’s drawing to handle the interrupt at leisure. The screen’s scan
keeps going exactly at the pace set by the video clock, whether or not program
code runs in the meantime. If the interrupt handler takes too long to finish, the
VDP will already have started drawing the next line with the old state, or the mo-
menttoupdateitintimewillsimplybemissed. Section5ofthischapterreturnsto
this idea in more detail.
2. Registering the handler in SGDK: SYS_setHIntCallback()
EnablingtheinterruptintheVDPisn’tenough: SGDKalsoneedstobetoldwhichCfunction
to run each time it occurs. That’s done with:
void SYS_setHIntCallback(VoidCallback *CB);
which takes a pointer to a function with no parameters and no return value. It’s the same
pattern already used with SYS_setVBlankCallback() to hook into the vblank, but with an im-
portantdifference: thefunctionregisteredastheHInterrupthandlerhastobedeclaredwith
a special macro, HINTERRUPT_CALLBACK, instead of the usual void:
434

=== PAGE 441 ===
HINTERRUPT_CALLBACK hintHandler(void)
{
// the handler's body
}
HINTERRUPT_CALLBACK is nothing more than a void with an added compiler attribute
(__attribute__((interrupt))), which tells the compiler that this function will be invoked
directlyasthetargetofa68000interrupt,ratherthanasanormalcallfromelsewhereinthe
C program. That makes the compiler generate a different function prologue and epilogue:
it makes sure to save and restore every CPU register it uses, and to end with the 68000’s
interrupt-returninstructioninsteadofanordinarysubroutinereturn. Ifyouforgetthemacro
and declare the handler as a regular function, the program may still compile but corrupt
CPUregistersattheworstpossiblemoment, producingintermittentfailuresthatarehardto
track down.
With that, enabling an HInterrupt that fires, say, every 8 lines comes down to three lines of
code, typically placed during initialization:
SYS_setHIntCallback(hintHandler);
VDP_setHIntCounter(7); // 7 + 1 = every 8 lines
VDP_setHInterrupt(TRUE);
3. Per-line scroll: the other half of the effect
Chapter 17 showed HSCROLL_TILE, which allows an independent horizontal offset for each 8-
pixelrowofaplane. TheVDPsupportsanevenfinergranularity,HSCROLL_LINE,whichallows
a different horizontal offset value for each individual line of the screen, without grouping
them in sets of 8. It’s enabled with the same function already covered:
VDP_setScrollingMode(HSCROLL_LINE, VSCROLL_PLANE);
and updated with the equivalent of VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile() for this granularity:
void VDP_setHorizontalScrollLine(VDPPlane plane, u16 line, s16 *values, u16 len,
↪ TransferMethod tm);
The parameters are analogous to those of VDP_setHorizontalScrollTile(): plane is BG_A or
BG_B; line is the first screen line, counted from the top, from which the values are applied;
values is an array holding one offset per line; len is the number of lines to update; and tm is
the transfer method (CPU, DMA, DMA_QUEUE, or DMA_QUEUE_COPY, as covered in chapter 44).
Here’s a key point worth emphasizing, because it tends to cause confusion: this table of per-
lineoffsetsisreadbytheVDPonitsown,automatically,everytimeitdrawseachscreenline.
Thatmeansaripplingeffect—liketheclassicwaterreflection,witheachhorizontalstripoff-
setslightlydifferentlyfromtheoneaboveit—doesn’tnecessarilyrequire anHInterrupt:
it’s enough to compute the entire table of values once per frame, during the vblank, and up-
load it all at once with a single call to VDP_setHorizontalScrollLine(). The VDP then takes
care, in real time throughout the whole active drawing pass, of reading a different value for
each line without the program having to intervene line by line. This is, in fact, the simplest
and most common way to achieve a rippling water effect in SGDK, and it needs none of what
was explained in sections 1 and 2.
So what is the HInterrupt needed for? For everything that table can’t resolve on its own:
• Changing something that has no per-line table. The VDP’s background color
435

=== PAGE 442 ===
(VDP_setBackgroundColor())isasinglevalue,notatable: ifyouwantaskythatchanges
shadelinebyline,oradifferentcolorbandforthe“ground”ofabackground,there’sno
way to preload that into a one-shot table; you have to rewrite that value exactly when
the scan beam crosses each line, and only an HInterrupt can do that.
• Vertical scroll has no per-line granularity. Unlike horizontal scroll, which supports
uptoonevalueperline(HSCROLL_LINE),theVDP’sverticaloffsetonlysupportstwogranu-
larities: perwholeplane(VSCROLL_PLANE)orpertwo-tilecolumns(VSCROLL_COLUMN,called
VSCROLL_2TILE in old versions of SGDK). There’s no “one vertical offset per line” table
analogous to the horizontal one. Any effect that needs to vary the vertical scroll line by
line — a relatively rare need, but one that shows up in some pseudo-perspective effects
— can only be achieved by writing directly to VSRAM from an HInterrupt.
• “Hard”screensplits. AHUDthatshouldn’tmovewhiletherestofthescreenscrolls,or
azonethatusesadifferentplaneconfigurationthantherest,ishandledbyreconfiguring
the VDP exactly at the split line, something that by definition happens in the middle of
the frame and doesn’t allow for a precomputed table.
The rest of this chapter builds an example combining both pieces: a fixed “sky” strip at the
top and a “water” strip at the bottom, whose per-line offset is recalculated in real time, band
by band, triggered by a real HInterrupt.
4. Full example: differential scroll by bands
The example divides the screen into bands 8 lines tall (to simplify the calculations, although
HSCROLL_LINEwouldalsoallowsingle-linebands). Aboveacutoffline, WATER_START,theback-
ground is shown with no additional offset. Below that line, each 8-line band receives a differ-
ent horizontal offset, taken from a precomputed wave table, which also rotates by one step
each frame to give a sense of motion: the classic water effect.
#include <genesis.h>
#define BAND_HEIGHT 8 // height of each band, in lines
#define WATER_START 144 // line where the water starts (multiple of
↪ BAND_HEIGHT)
#define WAVE_SIZE 32 // number of entries in the wave table
// Precomputed horizontal offset table (a low-amplitude wave).
// The values are in pixels; they could be generated with sin() at design time,
// but are left as constants to avoid depending on floating-point calculations.
static const s16 waveTable[WAVE_SIZE] =
{
0, 6, 12, 17, 20, 22, 22, 20,
17, 12, 6, 0, -6,-12,-17,-20,
-22,-22,-20,-17,-12, -6, 0, 6,
12, 17, 20, 22, 22, 20, 17, 12
};
static u16 rasterLine; // screen line about to be drawn
static u16 waveFrame; // wave phase; advances one step per frame
// HInterrupt handler: runs once every BAND_HEIGHT lines.
// Must be as short as possible: no calls to heavy functions,
// no DMA, nothing that could take longer than the time available before the
// VDP starts drawing the next line.
HINTERRUPT_CALLBACK hintHandler(void)
436

=== PAGE 443 ===
{
if (rasterLine >= WATER_START)
{
u16 index = (((rasterLine - WATER_START) >> 3) + waveFrame) & (WAVE_SIZE -
↪ 1);
s16 offset = waveTable[index];
s16 values[BAND_HEIGHT] = { offset, offset, offset, offset,
offset, offset, offset, offset };
VDP_setHorizontalScrollLine(BG_B, rasterLine, values, BAND_HEIGHT, CPU);
}
rasterLine += BAND_HEIGHT;
}
// Runs once per frame, during the vblank: resets the line counter
// for the frame that's starting and advances the wave phase.
void onVBlank(void)
{
rasterLine = 0;
waveFrame = (waveFrame + 1) & (WAVE_SIZE - 1);
}
int main(bool hardReset)
{
// A background is assumed to already be loaded into BG_B, as explained in
// chapter 7 and onward; the example focuses on the raster effect itself.
VDP_setScrollingMode(HSCROLL_LINE, VSCROLL_PLANE);
rasterLine = 0;
waveFrame = 0;
SYS_setVBlankCallback(onVBlank);
SYS_setHIntCallback(hintHandler);
VDP_setHIntCounter(BAND_HEIGHT - 1); // fires every 8 lines
VDP_setHInterrupt(TRUE);
while (TRUE)
{
// The rest of the game logic can go here, completely unrelated
// to the raster effect: once configured, it runs on its own via
// interrupts, without the main loop needing to deal with it.
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return 0;
}
A few of the example’s decisions deserve a separate explanation:
• Thelinecounter,rasterLine,isresetinthevblankcallback(onVBlank()),andnotatany
other point in the main loop, because the vblank is the only moment you can be sure
437

=== PAGE 444 ===
corresponds exactly to the start of a new frame. If it were reset in the middle of the
main loop, it could fall out of sync with the scan beam’s actual position.
• The handler runs for every band on the screen, including the sky bands, but for those
bandstheifimmediatelydiscardsthework. That’sabitof“wasted”CPUtimeonbands
where nothing is needed, but it keeps the example simple; a more optimized version
couldreprogramVDP_setHIntCounter()insidethehandleritselfthefirsttimeitcrosses
WATER_START, so the interrupt stops firing entirely in the sky zone and only starts right
where it’s needed.
• The transfer method used inside the handler is CPU, never DMA, DMA_QUEUE, nor
DMA_QUEUE_COPY. The next section explains why.
The visual result is what you’d expect from this kind of effect: the top sky strip stays fixed,
with no offset at all, while below the cutoff line each 8-pixel band moves with a horizontal
offset different from its neighbors, following the shape of the wave table. The progressive
difference between adjacent bands is what creates the sense of a rippling surface, rather
than blocks simply sliding each at its own speed with no relation to one another.
5. Cautions and limitations
The handler must be extremely fast. Between when an HInterrupt fires and when the
VDP starts drawing the next line, there’s very little margin: just the duration of the horizon-
tal blank, the interval between the end of one visible line and the start of the next. With
BAND_HEIGHT = 8,theexample’shandlerhasthewidthofeightfulllinesofmarginbeforethe
next trigger, which is more than enough to write eight words into the scroll table. An effect
configuredtofireoneveryline(VDP_setHIntCounter(0)),bycontrast,hasonlythemarginof
asingleline,andthehandlerhastobetrimmeddowntothebareminimum: noloops,nocalls
to functions beyond what’s strictly necessary, no calculations that aren’t already resolved in
a table.
Don’tuseDMAinsidethehandler. DMA,asexplainedinchapter44,hasitsownsetupcost
and blocks the CPU until it finishes; triggering it from inside an HInterrupt adds that cost at
exactlythemomentwiththeleastmarginavailable,andcanendupconsumingseveralwhole
linesinsteadofafractionofone. ThesameappliestoDMA_QUEUEandDMA_QUEUE_COPY:queuing
a transfer for “the next vblank” makes no sense inside a handler that runs in the middle of
active drawing, still far from the next vblank. The only reasonable transfer method inside an
HInterrupt is CPU, and in limited amounts: a few words, not a whole tileset.
Watchoutforreentrancy. Ifthehandler’sworktakeslonger,forwhateverreason,thanthe
configured interval between triggers, the next trigger’s moment can arrive before the previ-
ous one has finished. On the 68000, this doesn’t necessarily produce a second, overlapping
execution of the same handler, but it can cause the next trigger to be lost or delayed, with
the visible result of a band that “jumps” a position or looks misaligned for one frame. The
simplest way to avoid the problem isn’t to program the handler to tolerate reentrancy, but to
makesure,withmargintosparethroughcarefulmeasurement,thatitnevergetsclosetothe
available time limit.
AvoidleavingHInterruptsactiveinpartsofthegamethatdon’tneedthem. Whenthe
screen using the raster effect ends — a level transition, a pause screen, a menu — it’s best
to turn off the interrupt with VDP_setHInterrupt(FALSE) rather than leaving it active with a
handler that no longer makes sense for the current screen. Besides saving the CPU time it
consumes,thisavoidstheriskoftheoldhandleractingonaplaneorscrolltablethatthenew
screen has already reconfigured for another purpose.
Variablessharedbetweenthehandlerandtherestoftheprogramshouldstaysimple.
This chapter’s example shares only two variables (rasterLine, waveFrame) between the HIn-
438

=== PAGE 445 ===
terrupt handler, the vblank callback, and potentially the rest of the game. The more shared
variables there are, and the more complex the logic that updates them, the greater the risk
that an interrupt occurs right in the middle of a half-finished update from the main code.
Keeping that set of variables as small and simple as possible — integer counters, read-only
tables — is, in practice, the simplest way to avoid that kind of intermittent bug.
Review exercises
1. Explainthedifferencebetweenachievingaripplingwatereffectbyuploadingthefullta-
bleviaVDP_setHorizontalScrollLine()onceperframeduringthevblank,versusachiev-
ing it with an HInterrupt that recalculates each band in real time. In which cases is the
second option specifically necessary?
2. Whycan’ttheVDP’sbackgroundcolor(VDP_setBackgroundColor())bevariedlinebyline
withaprecomputedtable,unlikehorizontalscroll? Whatmechanismisneededinstead?
3. A teammate writes an HInterrupt handler that calls PAL_setPalette() with DMA_QUEUE
to change palettes halfway down the screen. The effect doesn’t work as expected, and
on top of that, the game starts showing erratic behavior in other parts of the screen.
Explain the two separate problems with that approach.
4. In the example from section 4, what would happen if WATER_START weren’t a multiple
of BAND_HEIGHT? Explain the specific problem it would cause with the alignment of the
bands.
5. Why doesn’t a plane’s vertical scroll support a per-line granularity equivalent to
HSCROLL_LINE, and what alternative is available for an effect that does need to vary the
vertical offset line by line?
439

=== PAGE 446 ===
Chapter 64 — Saving Games -
SRAM and Flash Save
The cartridge’s battery-backed SRAM, the save declaration in the ROM header, SGDK’s
sram.h unit, and a modern battery-free alternative
Upuntilnow,everytimeagameended—whetherbyturningofftheconsoleorresettingthe
emulator — all the information that existed only in the 68000’s working RAM disappeared:
thelevelreached, thescore, thestateofevery enemy. That’s exactlywhatyou’dexpect from
an ordinary variable, but it’s a real problem for any game that aspires to be played across
more than one session. This chapter tackles that concrete question: how to make a handful
ofbytessurvivetheconsolebeingturnedoff,usingthesamehardwaremechanismthatmade
cartridges like Phantasy Star IV or Sonic 3 famous, and the layer SGDK provides on top of it.
It’saself-containedtopic: itdoesn’tdependonthepreviouschapterofthisPartX(dedicated
to horizontal interrupts), but instead picks up ideas from further back in the manual, in par-
ticular the use of struct to group related data (Chapter 53) and the level catalog built as
permanent data in Part IX.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have:
• Familiarity with C structs for grouping data, as presented in Chapter 53 (“C structs
applied to game entities”).
• Familiarity with the level catalog built as game data in Part IX (for example, an array or
enum that identifies each level by an index), which this chapter revisits as the typical
piece of data to persist between sessions.
• A general sense of how SGDK organizes a project and builds a ROM (Chapter 5), since
this chapter modifies the ROM header.
1. What cartridge SRAM is, and why it exists
The 68000’s working memory (the system RAM) loses its contents as soon as power is cut:
it’s volatile memory, and there’s no way around that with the original Mega Drive hardware.
For a game to remember anything from one session to the next, it needs a different kind of
memory — one that keeps its contents even without external power.
Thesolutionadoptedbymanycartridgesoftheera—notallofthem,sinceitaddedmanufac-
turingcost—wastoincludeinsidethecartridgeitselfanSRAM(staticRAM)chipbackedby
a small lithium battery soldered to the board. While the console is powered on, that SRAM
is read and written just like any other mapped memory region; when the console is turned
440

=== PAGE 447 ===
off, the battery keeps the chip powered with minimal consumption, and its contents persist.
When the console is turned on again, the SRAM comes back with the same data it held the
last time it was written.
That battery is also the cause of a problem well known to anyone who has played original
cartridgesdecadesaftertheyweremanufactured: onceitrunsout,theSRAMstopsretaining
data, and saved games are lost as soon as power is cut. It’s a physical limitation of the
mechanism, not something software can work around, and it’s part of why section 6 of this
chapter covers a modern alternative that doesn’t depend on any battery.
CartridgeSRAMbelongstothecartridge,nottheconsole: everycartridgewithsave
supportbringsitsownchipanditsownbattery. Thatmattersbecauseitmeansthe
available space and its exact behavior depend on how the cartridge’s hardware is
built, not on the Mega Drive itself.
2. Declaring SRAM usage in the ROM header
The Mega Drive’s memory map reserves an entire region for a cartridge, if it has SRAM, to
expose it there. But nothing requires a cartridge to have it: that’s why the ROM includes,
withinitsheader(themetadataareaatthestartoftheROMalreadymentionedinpassingin
earlierchaptersforotherfields,suchasthevideoregion),aspecificblockdeclaringwhether
the game uses SRAM, in what address range, and of what type.
That declaration isn’t a cosmetic detail: it’s the information consulted both by real SRAM-
equipped cartridge hardware and by modern emulators and flash carts to decide whether
they should reserve persistent space for that particular game and at what address to expect
the accesses. Without a correct declaration in the header, a write to the SRAM region may
fail to persist, or may have no effect at all, even if the code correctly calls the save functions.
SGDKexposesthisconfigurationasaproject-leveldirective,withnoneedtohand-editheader
bytes. The usual approach is to define it in the project’s configuration file (or, in simpler
projects, with a macro at the top of main.c):
// Enables the SRAM block in the ROM header,
// declaring a 64 KB range of 8-bit SRAM.
#define SRAM_SIZE 0x10000
#define SRAM_TYPE 0 // 0 = normal SRAM (byte-wide), no automatic backup
Conceptually,whatmattersmorethantheexactmacronamearethetwopiecesofinformation
that declaration fixes: how much SRAM the cartridge has (up to 64 KB in the simplest
variant, addressed as bytes) and whether that SRAM is battery-backed or not. An emulator
that respects the header creates, the first time it runs that ROM, an associated save file
(typically with a .srm extension) that reproduces the behavior of that battery: it persists
between emulator runs just as the battery persists between power cycles on real hardware.
3. SGDK’s sram.h unit
WithSRAMalreadydeclaredintheheader,SGDKoffersadedicatedunit,sram.h,forreading
and writing it from game code without having to calculate memory addresses by hand or
worry about the exact mapping the hardware uses to expose it.
Before any access, it must be explicitly enabled:
void SRAM_enable(void);
441

=== PAGE 448 ===
SRAM_enable()enablesaccesstothecartridge’sSRAMarea;itshouldbecalledonce,typically
at the start of main(), before any read or write. There’s also a counterpart to disable access
once a save operation is done, leaving the bus in the proper state for the rest of the game:
void SRAM_disable(void);
WithSRAMenabled,thebasicreadandwritefunctionsworkoveranoffsetwithinthatregion,
not over an absolute memory address:
u8 SRAM_readByte(u32 offset);
u16 SRAM_readWord(u32 offset);
void SRAM_writeByte(u32 offset, u8 value);
void SRAM_writeWord(u32 offset, u16 value);
For blocks larger than a single byte or word — like the progress struct built in section 4 — a
function that copies an entire array in one go is more convenient than iterating byte by byte
from game code:
void SRAM_readAll(u8 *dest, u32 offset, u32 len);
void SRAM_writeAll(const u8 *src, u32 offset, u32 len);
All of these functions assume SRAM_enable() has already been called. An important detail
of the real hardware, which SGDK handles internally but which is worth keeping in mind:
on many cartridges, SRAM is mapped as 8-bit memory on a 16-bit bus, which means every
“word”accessactuallyoccupiestwoaddresspositionswithonlyoneusefulbyteineach. This
is exactly the kind of detail that makes it worth relying on the sram.h functions instead of
computing offsets by hand: the unit already resolves it consistently.
4. Saving and loading a progress structure
The most common use case isn’t saving loose bytes, but a small structure holding the state a
game needs to remember. Picking up the level catalog from Part IX, a reasonable example is
saving the highest level reached and the highest score achieved:
typedef struct
{
u16 highestLevel; // index of the highest level reached, within the level
↪ catalog
u32 highScore; // highest score recorded
u8 checksum; // simple integrity check, computed on save
} GameProgress;
ThechecksumfieldisthemissingpiecebeforetrustinganydatareadbackfromSRAM.SRAM
with a battery that hasn’t run out is reliable, but a weak battery, SRAM that has never been
writtenbefore(filledwithanarbitraryfactoryvalue,notnecessarilyzeros),or,onaflashcart,
a corrupted save file, are all real scenarios. Before using the data read back to decide which
level to start on, it’s worth computing a simple checksum over the rest of the structure and
comparing it against the one saved alongside the data:
// Computes a simple checksum: the sum of every byte in progress,
// excluding the checksum field itself, truncated to 8 bits.
static u8 compute_checksum(const GameProgress *progress)
{
const u8 *bytes = (const u8 *) progress;
u16 sum = 0;
442

=== PAGE 449 ===
for (u16 i = 0; i < sizeof(GameProgress) - sizeof(progress->checksum); i++)
sum += bytes[i];
return (u8) sum;
}
With that helper function, saving progress amounts to filling in the checksum and dumping
the whole structure to SRAM:
#define SAVE_OFFSET 0
void save_progress(u16 highestLevel, u32 highScore)
{
GameProgress progress;
progress.highestLevel = highestLevel;
progress.highScore = highScore;
progress.checksum = 0; // filled in afterward, once the rest of the fields are
↪ set
progress.checksum = compute_checksum(&progress);
SRAM_enable();
SRAM_writeAll((const u8 *) &progress, SAVE_OFFSET, sizeof(GameProgress));
SRAM_disable();
}
Loading progress follows the reverse path, but it should never blindly trust what it reads: if
the checksum doesn’t match, the right move is to treat the SRAM as empty and return initial
values, rather than starting the game with a corrupted highestLevel that could, in the worst
case, push the level catalog out of range:
bool load_progress(GameProgress *out)
{
GameProgress progress;
SRAM_enable();
SRAM_readAll((u8 *) &progress, SAVE_OFFSET, sizeof(GameProgress));
SRAM_disable();
u8 expected = compute_checksum(&progress);
if (progress.checksum != expected)
return FALSE; // missing or corrupted data: no valid saved game
*out = progress;
return TRUE;
}
The typical call, when the game starts, is then:
GameProgress progress;
if (load_progress(&progress))
443

=== PAGE 450 ===
{
// There's a valid saved game: use progress.highestLevel
// to jump directly to the corresponding level in the catalog.
}
else
{
// No saved game (or it was corrupted): start
// from the first level in the catalog with a score of zero.
progress.highestLevel = 0;
progress.highScore = 0;
}
Saving again — for example, every time the player completes a level or beats their high
score — is simply a matter of calling save_progress() again with the updated values. No
prior “erase” operation is needed: writing over the same SAVE_OFFSET directly replaces the
previous contents.
This same scheme — struct with a checksum, SRAM_writeAll()/SRAM_readAll() over a fixed
offset—scaleswithoutchangestoaricherprogressstructure(multiplesaveslots,inventory,
optionssettings): eachadditionalpieceofdataisjustonemorefieldinthestruct,andeachin-
dependentsaveslotissimplyadifferentSAVE_OFFSET,spacedapartbysizeof(GameProgress).
In terms of memory, the cartridge ends up organized into two clearly separated regions: the
ROM, read-only, where the game’s code and data live, and the SRAM region, mapped sepa-
rately and backed by its battery. Within that SRAM region, GameProgress occupies a fixed
block starting at SAVE_OFFSET: the struct’s three fields (highestLevel, highScore, and check-
sum) sit one after another, in the same order in which they were defined, together occupying
sizeof(GameProgress) bytes.
5. Before reading: checking whether SRAM is available
Not every environment a ROM can run on has SRAM configured the same way: an emulator
that hasn’t yet initialized its associated .srm file, or factory-fresh SRAM that has never been
written, returns arbitrary bytes (often all 0xFF) instead of zeros. This is exactly the case the
checksum from the previous section is meant to catch: if nothing was ever saved, the initial
readwon’tmatchanyvalidchecksum,andload_progress()returnsFALSE,sendingthegame
down the “no saved game” path instead of interpreting factory bytes as if they were a real
level.
That’s why it’s worth resisting the temptation to skip the checksum check “since the SRAM
is already declared in the header”: the declaration in the ROM header guarantees that the
space exists and that an emulator or flash cart will persist it, but it guarantees absolutely
nothing about whether what’s there at any given moment is actually a valid GameProgress
written by this same game.
6. Flash save: the battery-free alternative
Everything above describes the historical mechanism, designed for a physical cartridge with
a soldered battery. For those developing today and testing mainly on modern flash carts
— devices like EverDrive, which load a ROM from an SD card and run it on real hardware
withoutneedingtomanufactureacartridgeforeveryversion—there’saconsiderablysimpler
alternative to work with from the development side: flash save.
444

=== PAGE 451 ===
Insteadofrelyingonabattery-backedSRAMchip,theseflashcartsoffertheirownpersistent
savemechanismbasedonflashmemory(thesametechnologyusedinSDcards),managedby
the flash cart itself rather than by a discrete chip on the cartridge board. From the point of
view of SGDK and game code, the practical difference is usually minimal or nonexistent: the
same sram.h unit, with the same size declaration in the ROM header, is the interface these
devicesalsoexpecttofind,sothesamesave_progress()/load_progress()codefromsection
4 works unchanged both on an emulator with simulated SRAM and on a flash cart with real
flash-based saving.
The advantage for modern development is twofold: there’s no need to manufacture or pro-
gramaphysicalbattery-backedcartridgetotestsavingonrealhardware,andthere’snorisk
of a battery running out between one testing session and the next. The downside is that
it remains, ultimately, a feature of the flash cart device used for testing, not of the Mega
Drive itself: a commercial cartridge actually manufactured for sale still needs, if it’s going
to offer persistent saving, to deal with the battery-backed SRAM mechanism (or some later
variant, such as the non-volatile memory chips that replaced the battery in later generations
of cartridges) from section 1 onward.
Review exercises
1. Explain why cartridge SRAM needs to be declared in the ROM header, and what would
happen if a game writes data to that region without having correctly declared its size
and type.
2. Why isn’t it enough to directly read the fields of a GameProgress saved in SRAM and
use them as-is, without checking a checksum first? Given a cartridge with a dead bat-
tery, describe what the game would see on startup if load_progress() didn’t check the
checksum.
3. A teammate proposes saving highestLevel and highScore as two independent calls to
SRAM_writeWord()/SRAM_writeByte(),insteadofbuildingastruct GameProgressandus-
ing a block function. What concrete advantage does grouping everything into a struct
saved in one shot with SRAM_writeAll() have instead?
4. FromthepointofviewoftheSGDKAPI,whatdoacartridgewithbattery-backedSRAM
and a modern flash cart with flash save have in common? What real difference persists
between the two, beyond the game code?
5. Design the offset scheme needed to save three independent save slots using the same
struct GameProgress from this chapter, so that each slot can be read and verified (with
its own checksum) without affecting the other two.
445

=== PAGE 452 ===
Chapter 65 — Multitasking and
Advanced SGDK 2.x Features
AbrieflookatrecentSGDKadditionsthatdon’tfitintoanyearlierchapter: cooperativetasks,
dynamic memory, and resource compression
The previous chapters of this part covered specific, well-delimited topics: horizontal inter-
ruptsandtheiruseforlineeffects, andSRAMhandlingforsavedgames. Thischaptercloses
Part X with something different: a set of features that SGDK gradually added throughout its
2.x series (from version 2.00 onward) and that, being either more general or more recent,
didn’t have a natural place in any earlier chapter of the manual. There isn’t a single unifying
theme, but there is a common denominator: these are tools that solve problems that only
show up once a project grows beyond a technical demo, and it’s worth knowing about them,
even just at an introductory level, before taking on a larger project of your own.
Prerequisites
• The main loop and SYS_doVBlankProcess(), introduced in Chapter 5.
• The concept of interrupts and the difference between code driven by hardware events
and code that runs inside the main loop, revisited in the previous chapter on horizontal
interrupts.
• A general sense of how SGDK organizes its resources in ROM (Chapter 39).
• SomefamiliaritywithpointersanddynamicmemoryinC(malloc/freeasaconcept,even
though SGDK doesn’t use exactly those functions).
1. The problem that motivates cooperative multitasking
A good part of the code in a Mega Drive game is naturally written as a state machine: a
variable indicates what state a character or sequence is in (walking, jumping, falling; or, in
a cutscene, “showing text,” “waiting for the player to press a button,” “moving the camera”),
andoneverypassthroughthemainloopafunctionchecksthatstateanddecideswhattodo.
It’s a pattern that works well and that has already been used implicitly in earlier chapters of
this manual, but it becomes awkward to write by hand when a sequence has many chained
steps that must happen one after another across several frames: a cutscene with dialogue,
cameramovements,andinterspersedwaits,forexample,endsupturningintoastatemachine
with dozens of cases, hard to read because the logical order of the sequence gets scattered
across a switch and several control variables.
What in a normal desktop program would be solved with a separate thread — writing the
sequence as a linear function, top to bottom, and letting the operating system handle split-
ting CPU time between that function and the rest of the program — isn’t available in the
446

=== PAGE 453 ===
same way on the Mega Drive: there’s no operating system with a thread scheduler, and the
68000executesasingleinstructionstreamatatime. Evenso,SGDK’s2.xseriesintroduceda
mechanismthatallowssomethingsimilarwithinthatconstraint: acooperative tasksystem,
designed for writing long sequences as linear code instead of as an explicit state machine.
2. What SGDK’s cooperative multitasking is (and isn’t)
It’sworthclarifyingupfrontwhatkindof“multitasking”thisis,becausethetermcanbemis-
leading. Thisisnotrealparallelexecution: theMegaDrivestillhasasingle68000executing
a single instruction at a time, just like in any other chapter of this manual. What SGDK of-
fers is a cooperative context-switching mechanism: each “task” is a function with its own
separately reserved stack, and SGDK’s internal scheduler takes turns handing the processor
to each task, saving and restoring the execution context (the 68000’s registers and the stack
pointer) when switching from one task to another. The difference from a hardware interrupt
— like the ones seen in the previous chapter — is that this task switch isn’t triggered by the
hardware at an arbitrary instant; rather, it’s decided by the task itself, voluntarily, by call-
ing a function that hands control back to the scheduler. It’s “cooperative” precisely for that
reason: a task that never yields control blocks all the others, including the main loop, just as
completely as an infinite loop without calls to SYS_doVBlankProcess() would.
This enables a coding style very different from the traditional state machine. A cutscene
sequence that used to require a state variable and a switch with one case per step can be
written, inside a task, as an ordinary function that proceeds from top to bottom, and that,
at the points where it needs to “wait” — for an animation to finish, for a certain number of
frames to pass, for the player to press a button — simply yields control and gets it back later,
at the exact point where it had left off, once the wait condition is met.
The usual skeleton of this pattern, regardless of the exact name of each function, looks like
this:
// Task that runs a multi-step intro sequence,
// written as linear code instead of as a state machine.
void introSequenceTask(void)
{
showText("Welcome to the adventure");
waitFrames(60); // yields control for 60 frames
moveCameraTo(200, 0);
waitCameraArrived(); // yields control until the camera arrives
showText("Press START to begin");
waitButtonPress(BUTTON_START);
}
Eachofthewaitingfunctions(waitFrames(),waitCameraArrived(),waitButtonPress()inthis
example)is,internally,aloopthatcheckstheconditionandyieldstheturnbacktothesched-
uler over and over while that condition isn’t met, in a way similar to how the game’s main
loopyieldsitsturntotheVDPbycallingSYS_doVBlankProcess(). Thedifferencefromwriting
that same logic directly in the main loop is that, while the intro task is “waiting,” the rest of
the game — including the main loop itself, which can keep calling other tasks or continuing
with its own logic — isn’t blocked: the scheduler distributes time among all active tasks on
every pass.
A task that performs a long computation without ever yielding control — for ex-
ample, a loop with thousands of iterations and no intermediate call to the yield
447

=== PAGE 454 ===
mechanism—behavesexactlyasbadlyasthatsamecomputationplaceddirectlyin
the main loop without calling SYS_doVBlankProcess(): it blocks everything else for
as long as it runs. Cooperative multitasking doesn’t automatically distribute CPU
time; it only offers an escape point that’s more convenient to use than a manual
state machine.
EachtaskalsoneedsitsownstackreservedinRAMinordertosaveitscontextwhenyielding
control, and that RAM is a scarce resource on the Mega Drive (barely 64 KB in total). That’s
why the stack size for each task is usually an explicit parameter when creating it, and it’s
worth sizing it carefully: too small, and a sequence with nested function calls can silently
overflow it and corrupt neighboring memory; too large, and several active tasks at once can
exhaust the RAM available for the rest of the game. In practice, this mechanism is best
reservedforsequencesthatgenuinelybenefitfrombeingwrittenaslinearcode—cutscenes,
dialoguescripts,longbossattackpatterns—ratherthanasageneralreplacementforframe-
by-framegameplaylogic,whichisstillbetterhandledwiththemainloopasusedthroughout
the rest of this manual.
3. Improvements in dynamic memory handling
AnotherareawhereSGDKadvancedthroughoutits2.xseries,withouthavinghadadedicated
chapter until now, is dynamic memory handling. SGDK has always offered MEM_alloc() and
MEM_free() as equivalents of standard C’s malloc()/free(), adapted to the Mega Drive’s lim-
ited RAM, and it’s the recommended way to allocate memory at runtime instead of using the
standard C library functions directly.
Recentversionsofthismemoryunitimprovedboththeallocator’sperformance(lessfragmen-
tation when reusing freed blocks of similar size) and the tools for diagnosing memory issues
during development: functions for finding out how much free memory remains available at a
given moment, and for inspecting the heap’s state, are particularly useful when debugging a
crash that only appears after playing for several minutes — a typical symptom of a memory
leak (code that allocates with MEM_alloc() and, along some code path, forgets to free it with
MEM_free()).
// Before loading a new level's resources, it's worth
// recording how much free memory remains, to detect leaks
// by comparing this value from one playthrough to the next.
u32 freeBefore = MEM_getFree();
loadLevelResources();
u32 freeAfter = MEM_getFree();
As a general rule of good practice, it’s best to allocate with MEM_alloc() as few times as
possible during active gameplay — ideally, all the dynamic memory a level needs is allocated
once when it loads, and freed all at once when leaving it — rather than constantly allocating
and freeing small blocks frame by frame, a pattern that fragments the heap over time even
with a well-optimized allocator.
4. Resource compression and the resource compiler
SGDK’s resource compiler, already introduced in Chapter 39 for converting images, tilesets,
and maps into data embedded in the ROM, gained compression support for several resource
types throughout the 2.x series. The underlying idea is simple: many graphics and sound
resources have considerable internal redundancy (repeated areas of a tileset, silences in an
audio track), and compressing them when building the ROM lets them take up less space on
448

=== PAGE 455 ===
the cartridge in exchange for a runtime decompression cost, which SGDK handles automati-
cally with decompression functions provided by the library itself.
Inpractice,thisisdeclaredasanadditionaloptionintheresourcefile(thesame.resformat
used since Chapter 39), specifying the desired compression method for a given resource in-
stead of leaving it uncompressed. SGDK’s own engine takes care of detecting, when loading
thatresourcefromROM,thatit’scompressed,andofinvokingthecorrespondingdecompres-
sion routine before using it, transparently to code that already knew how to draw an image
or play back a tileset without compression.
Thepracticalresultfortheprogrammeristhataprojectcangetmuchclosertoacartridge’s
space limit without having to manually reduce the quantity or quality of its graphics and
sound resources, as long as the CPU time budget spent on decompression — relevant above
allwhendecompressingalargeresourceduringtheloadingofanewlevel—fitswithinwhat
the game can afford at that moment, an analysis for which the same CPU load measurement
tools presented in Chapter 49 come in handy.
Review exercises
1. Explain in your own words the difference between the cooperative multitasking SGDK
offers and the real parallel execution of a multi-core operating system. Why does a task
that never yields control end up blocking the entire game?
2. RewritetheexamplesequencefromSection2(introSequenceTask)asatraditionalstate
machine (with a state variable and a switch). Compare the readability of both versions.
3. Whyisthestacksizeassignedtoeachtaskanimportantparameter,andwhatcanhappen
if it’s underestimated?
4. Whatconcreteadvantagedoescompressingagame’sgraphicsandsoundresourcesoffer
when building the ROM, and what cost must be weighed in exchange? Which tool from
an earlier chapter of this manual could be used to measure that cost in a real project?
449

=== PAGE 456 ===
Chapter 66 — Raylib as an
Alternative for Porting Games to
PC
What Raylib is, how it differs conceptually from SGDK, and why it can be the bridge to PC
and other platforms
This chapter steps away from the Mega Drive, for once. The previous chapters taught how
to program directly for the console’s hardware, with all the particularities that implies: 16-
colorpalettes,8×8tiles,aquantityofVRAMmeasuredinahandfulofkilobytes. Thischapter
introducesRaylib,agamedevelopmentlibraryforPCandothermodernplatforms,meantfor
anyone who—after having programmed for the Mega Drive with SGDK—wants to port their
gametoamoreaccessibleplatform, orsimplyprogramwithouttheconstraintsoflate-1980s
hardware.
This is not an exhaustive technical chapter about Raylib: there’s no need to cover its en-
tire API to understand what it offers. The idea, rather, is to show the conceptual parallel
between programming for the Mega Drive’s fixed hardware and programming for a modern
cross-platform library, and to verify, with a concrete code example, how much of a game’s
logic—structs, enums, state machines, simple physics—is actually independent of the target
platform.
Prerequisites
Before continuing, it helps to have covered:
• AgoodpartofthismanualandareasonablefamiliaritywithSGDK,inordertoappreciate
the contrast this chapter presents.
• Chapter 30, “Palette Fades”: it is directly compared, later on, with the way Raylib
achieves an equivalent effect.
• Chapter 31, “D-pad Controls”: the example in this chapter replicates, with Raylib, the
same sprite movement via the joypad that was built there for the Mega Drive.
It is not necessary to install Raylib to read this chapter, though it is worth doing so to experi-
ment with the example: it can be downloaded for free from its official site (raylib.com), with
packages already prepared for Windows, Linux, and macOS.
1. Why consider a PC port
Almost anyone developing a new game for the Mega Drive, sooner or later, considers the
possibility of also bringing it to PC or some modern console, simply because that makes it
450

=== PAGE 457 ===
accessible to far more people than those who still own, or emulate, the original hardware.
Before settling on one, it’s worth reviewing the available options.
One option is general-purpose game engines, such as Unreal Engine or Unity: engines de-
signed for much more ambitious productions, whose power is disproportionate for a game in
thestyleoftheonesbuiltinthismanual—aplatformerwith16-bitaesthetics. Anotheroption,
closer in spirit to programming directly for hardware, is to interact at a low level with the
Windows API; it’s an interesting path, but considerably more arduous than working with a
library already designed for games. Raylib occupies a middle ground between those two ex-
tremes: itisnotagameengine,butratherwhatitsowndocumentationcallsa“development
library” (a simple and easy-to-use library to enjoy videogames programming), with a spirit
quite similar to that of SGDK.
2. What Raylib is, and how similar it is to SGDK
Raylibisafree, cross-platformgamedevelopmentlibrary, withitssourcecodepubliclyavail-
able. Although it supports several programming languages through various bindings, the
languagethatmostofitscommunitygathersaroundisC,thesameonealreadyusedthrough-
outthismanualwithSGDK.Anyonewhohasfollowedthepreviouschaptersthereforedoesn’t
need to learn a new language to experiment with Raylib, only a different library.
Raylib’s official website is one of its strongest points: it includes a large number of already-
solved examples—title screens, cameras, and many other common use cases—that can be
used directly as a starting point, along with a reference sheet (cheatsheet) listing all the
functions grouped by module, and a wiki with more extensive guides.
ThemostimportantconceptualdifferencebetweenRaylibandSGDKhastodowithhoweach
one treats graphics. SGDK forces you to distinguish, at all times, whether something is a
background or a sprite, because that distinction exists in the Mega Drive’s hardware itself:
a background is built from a tile map with its own VRAM and palette limits, and a sprite is a
completelydifferenthardwareentity,withitsownlimitsonsizeandonhowmanycanappear
on screen at once. Raylib makes no such distinction: both a background and a sprite are
loaded the same way, as a generic 2D texture.
// In Raylib there is no structural difference between loading
// a background or a sprite: both are simply textures.
Texture2D background = LoadTexture("background.png");
Texture2D player_sprite = LoadTexture("player.png");
Going deeper. A good example to illustrate this difference is the screen fade-in, already
coveredinchapter30. OntheMegaDrive,dimmingthescreentoblackmeansmanipulating,
colorbycolor,thevaluesstoredinCRAM—theconsole’spalettememory—asexplainedinthat
chapterviaPAL_fadeIn(). InRaylib,thesameeffectisachievedbydrawingablackrectangle
thesizeoftheentirescreen,ontopofeverythingelse,andgraduallyvaryingitstransparency
until it becomes invisible:
// alpha starts at 1.0f (screen completely black)
// and is reduced frame by frame until it reaches 0.0f
DrawRectangle(0, 0, GetScreenWidth(), GetScreenHeight(),
Fade(BLACK, alpha));
The visual result is equivalent to that of PAL_fadeIn(), but the path to achieve it is radically
different: one depends on understanding and manipulating a specific, limited hardware re-
source (sixteen colors per palette, four palettes in total, 64 color slots in play); the other
depends solely on a generic property—transparency, handled here through the Fade() func-
451

=== PAGE 458 ===
tion, which adjusts a color’s alpha channel—that any modern graphics engine offers out of
the box, with no hardware limits involved.
After programming for a good while for the Mega Drive’s limited hardware, working with
Raylib can feel, at first, almost like cheating. It’s worth not taking that feeling too literally,
though: Raylib’sfunctionsarealldifferentfromSGDK’s,sothereisalearningcurvejustlike
withanynewtool. JustaswithSGDK,Raylibdoesn’thandyouafinishedgameengineeither:
you still have to build your own, with your own game logic, your own systems, and your own
code organization. What it does eliminate is much of the repetitive, uninteresting work (the
boilerplate)thathastobewrittenbeforegettingtothatactualgamelogic: openingawindow,
creatingamainloopatastableframerate,loadinganimage,orplayingasoundareeach,in
Raylib, a single function call.
3. The same movement, two platforms
ThebestwaytoseetheparallelbetweenSGDKandRaylibistocomparehoweachonesolves
the same problem: moving a character on screen based on what the player presses. Chapter
31 solved this for the Mega Drive with JOY_readJoypad() and the BUTTON_* constants:
static void handle_input(void)
{
u16 value = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1);
if (value & BUTTON_RIGHT)
player_x += 1;
else if (value & BUTTON_LEFT)
player_x -= 1;
if (value & BUTTON_UP)
player_y -= 1;
else if (value & BUTTON_DOWN)
player_y += 1;
SPR_setPosition(player, player_x, player_y);
SPR_update();
}
The equivalent version in Raylib needs no SGDK, ROM, or emulator: it’s a complete PC pro-
gram, compiled with any C compiler and run like any other executable on the operating sys-
tem.
#include "raylib.h"
int main(void)
{
const int screen_width = 320;
const int screen_height = 240;
InitWindow(screen_width, screen_height, "Movement example with Raylib");
SetTargetFPS(60);
// Player position, analogous to player_x/player_y in SGDK
Vector2 player_pos = { 100.0f, 50.0f };
Texture2D player_sprite = LoadTexture("player.png");
452

=== PAGE 459 ===
while (!WindowShouldClose())
{
// --- Logic: input reading, equivalent to handle_input() ---
if (IsKeyDown(KEY_RIGHT))
player_pos.x += 1.0f;
else if (IsKeyDown(KEY_LEFT))
player_pos.x -= 1.0f;
if (IsKeyDown(KEY_UP))
player_pos.y -= 1.0f;
else if (IsKeyDown(KEY_DOWN))
player_pos.y += 1.0f;
// --- Drawing: there is no separate SPR_update(), it is
// drawn directly every frame inside Begin/EndDrawing ---
BeginDrawing();
ClearBackground(BLACK);
DrawTextureV(player_sprite, player_pos, WHITE);
EndDrawing();
}
UnloadTexture(player_sprite);
CloseWindow();
return 0;
}
The overall structure is the same in both cases: a position value that gets updated based on
playerinput,andanif/else ifperaxistoallowdiagonalmovementwithoutneedingtochain
allfourdirectionstogether—exactlythesamereasoningasinchapter31. Whatchangesisthe
sourceoftheinput—JOY_readJoypad()againsttheBUTTON_*constantsinSGDK;IsKeyDown()
against the KEY_* constants in Raylib—and the way the result is applied on screen: SGDK
separatesSPR_setPosition()fromSPR_update(),whileRaylibhandlesallthedrawinginside
a BeginDrawing()/EndDrawing() block on every pass of the main loop, which also takes care
of clearing the previous frame with ClearBackground(). Raylib also supports gamepads via
IsGamepadButtonDown(), which brings the parallel with reading a Mega Drive joypad even
closer.
What’s interesting is to notice what didn’t change between one version and the other: the
position value itself, the idea of checking one direction at a time, the separation between
“read input” and “draw the result.” That part of the logic, the part that doesn’t depend on
anyhardwareregisteroranyplatform-specificfunction,isessentiallyportableas-isbetween
Mega Drive and PC. The same holds for more elaborate structures already seen in this man-
ual: a struct that groups an enemy’s position, velocity, and state (chapter 53), an enum that
identifies an enemy type or a game state (chapter 54 and chapter 57), or a function pointer
used to resolve an enemy’s AI (chapter 56) are written in standard C, with no dependency
on SGDK, and therefore compile just as well against Raylib. Porting a Mega Drive game to
PC with Raylib largely consists of reusing that code almost unchanged, and replacing only
the layer that interacts with the hardware—input reading, drawing, sound—with its Raylib
equivalent.
453

=== PAGE 460 ===
4. Beyond PC: other platforms thanks to the community
AlthoughRaylibwasbornmainlywithPCinmind,itscommunityhastakenitfurther. Onone
hand,thereareeffortstobringgamesmadewithRaylibtomodernconsoles,suchastheNin-
tendo Switch. On the other hand, and more experimentally, various people in the community
have been working on adapting Raylib to much older consoles, such as the Nintendo 64 and
the Dreamcast.
Atthetimeofwritingthischapter,thatworkofadaptingtoolderconsoleshasn’tyet
reached the point of simply compiling and being done: additional work is needed
to get there, and that work is under active development by the community. Since
this is an ongoing external effort, it’s worth checking the current state within the
Raylib community before treating this description as final.
Figure 157: Raylib running on Dreamcast
One of the community’s tests: Raylib running on Dreamcast, still in an experimental state.
Review exercises
1. ComparehowSGDKandRaylibhandleloadingabackgroundversusasprite,andexplain
what specific limitation of the Mega Drive’s hardware lies behind the distinction SGDK
requires.
2. ExplainhowafadetoblackisachievedinRaylib,andcompareitwithPAL_fadeIn()seen
in chapter 30. What is gained and what is lost with each approach?
3. Takethehandle_input()snippetfromthischapterandaddanexplicitfourthdiagonaldi-
rection(forexample,movingfasterif KEY_RIGHTandKEY_UParepressedsimultaneously).
What, if anything, would change in the equivalent SGDK version from chapter 31?
4. Although Raylib removes many hardware constraints, you still need to build your own
gameengine. Whydoesn’talibrarylikeRaylibofferthatoutofthebox,unlikeanengine
such as Unity or Unreal Engine?
454

=== PAGE 461 ===
5. Review the data structures used in Part IX of this manual (entity structs, state enums,
function pointers for AI). Which of them depend on some specific SGDK function, and
which would compile, as-is, against Raylib?
455

=== PAGE 462 ===
Chapter 67 — Scope Note - Sega
CD and 32X
Why this manual limits itself to the base Mega Drive hardware, and what paths exist for
anyone who wants to continue on to those two peripherals
Everything developed throughout this manual — from the first program to the capstone
project in Part IX — runs on the base Mega Drive hardware: the Motorola 68000 proces-
sor, the Z80 as sound coprocessor, the VDP, and the YM2612 and PSG chips described in
PartI.Segaalsoreleasedtwoperipheralsthatsubstantiallyexpandthathardware: theSega
CD (known as the Mega-CD outside North America), which adds an optical disc drive, a sec-
ond dedicated 68000 processor, and additional RAM; and the 32X, a cartridge that adds two
SH-2processorsanditsowngraphicsmodewithgreatercolordepth. Neitheroneiscovered
in this manual.
The reason is not that these are minor topics or of limited interest, but a matter of rigor:
writing with the same depth and technical reliability maintained throughout the previous
parts requires having reference material of the same caliber, verified with the same care as
theSGDK2.11changelogorthedma.hdocumentationcitedinPartVIII.NeithertheSegaCD
northe32Xhavethatkindofbackingwithinthematerialavailableforthisproject,andSGDK
itselfisdesignedfirstandforemostforthebaseMegaDrivehardware: supportforthesetwo
peripherals, where it exists in the homebrew development tooling ecosystem, comes from
separate kits and libraries, each with its own learning curve and its own set of hardware
quirks.
Including a superficial chapter on either peripheral, without sufficient verification, would go
against the standard upheld throughout this manual: when in doubt, it is better to flag a
featureaspendingverification—or,inthiscase,toleaveanentiretopicoutofscope—than
to offer information without the necessary reliability.
Anopendoor,notaclosedone. Whatyou’velearnedhereremainsthenecessary
foundation for taking the leap to the Sega CD or the 32X down the line: applied C
fundamentals, working with limited memory, organizing a project across multiple
files,thestructpatternsanddatacatalogsseeninthecapstoneproject,andreading
technicaldocumentationasaworkinghabitallcarryoverdirectlytoanyadditional
platform you might want to explore afterward. Anyone who reaches this point in
themanualandwantstocontinueontotheSegaCDorthe32Xwillfind,intoday’s
homebrewdevelopmentscene,dedicateddevelopmentkitsandactivecommunities
ready to guide those first steps, in the same way this manual supported your first
steps on the base hardware.
Thismanualcontinues,inthenextpart,withafinalprojectthatdoescarryacompletepipeline
from start to finish on the base Mega Drive hardware, closing out the journey begun in the
first chapter.
456

=== PAGE 463 ===
Review exercises
1. Name at least two hardware elements that the Sega CD adds on top of the base Mega
Drive, and two that the 32X adds.
2. Explain,inyourownwords,whythismanualpreferstoleaveatopicoutofscoperather
than treat it with less rigor than the rest of the chapters.
3. Ofeverythinglearnedinthepreviouspartsofthismanual,pickthreeconcreteconcepts
youconsidermosttransferabletoadifferenthardwareplatform,andjustifyyourchoice.
457

=== PAGE 464 ===
Chapter 68 — Final Project -
BOINGMD, a Pong Clone from
Start to Finish
Acomplete,playableMegaDrivegame,builtstepbystepwiththetoolspresentedthroughout
this manual
This manual began, in its first chapter, by describing the hardware of a console from 1988,
and ended, in the previous part, by pointing out the limits of what SGDK does and does not
cover. Between those two extremes, sixty-seven chapters of tools accumulated: data types
and pointers, planes and palettes, sprites and animation, sound, collision physics, DMA and
VRAM,andanentireprojectfeaturingenemieswiththeirownartificialintelligence. Thisfinal
chapterclosesthemanualwithadifferentgoalthanPartIX:insteadofleavinganopenproject
as a base for further extension, it builds a small but complete game, playable from start to
finish, to demonstrate that all those tools coexist without friction in a single real project.
The game is called BOINGMD, a clone of the classic Pong (1972) set in a simple aesthetic of
a ball bouncing between two paddles, inspired by the same spirit as the “Boing” game often
used as a first introductory project on other platforms. It is not a game with multiple levels
or the complexity of the Part IX project: it is, deliberately, the bare minimum needed for a
playertositdown,playatwo-minutematch,andfeelthatthegameiscomplete,withamenu,
a win condition, sound, and persistence of the high score between play sessions.
Prerequisites
This chapter assumes the entire manual up to this point. In particular, it directly relies on:
• Sprites, animation, and AABB collisions (Parts III and VII).
• Reading the joypad with JOY_setEventHandler() (Part IV).
• Playing sound effects with rescomp (Parts V and VI).
• Thestatemachinepatternwithenumandswitch,asappliedinthechapterongamestates
in Part IX.
• Saving game data with SRAM or flash save, from the previous chapter, to preserve the
high score between sessions.
• A simple HUD with VDP_drawText(), along the lines suggested at the close of Part IX.
1. The game design in one sentence
Two vertical paddles, one at each end of the screen, move up and down; a ball bounces be-
tween them and off the ceiling and floor; each time the ball crosses one end without the
458

=== PAGE 465 ===
correspondingpaddleinterceptingit,theplayerontheoppositesidescoresapoint;whoever
reaches a target score first wins the match. The player controls the left paddle with the D-
pad; the right paddle is controlled by a simple artificial intelligence, which chases the ball’s
height with a deliberate margin of error so the match remains winnable.
Reducing the design to a single sentence, before writing a single line of code, is a discipline
applicabletoanyprojectofyourown: ifthegamecannotbesummarizedthisway,itprobably
isn’t defined well enough yet to start coding.
2. Project structure
Followingtheorganizationalcriteriaseeninthechapteronheaderfiles,theprojectisdivided
into small pieces, each with a clear responsibility:
boingmd/
├── src/
│ ├── main.c
│ ├── paddle.c
│ ├── ball.c
│ ├── game.c
│ └── save.c
├── inc/
│ ├── paddle.h
│ ├── ball.h
│ ├── game.h
│ └── save.h
└── res/
├── resources.res
├── sprites/
└── sounds/
game.hholdsthestatemachineandthesharedvariables(scores,currentstate);paddle.cand
ball.ceachencapsulatethelogicfortheirownentity;andsave.cisolatesallinteractionwith
SRAM,sotherestoftheprojectonlyneedstocallload_high_score()andsave_high_score()
without knowing the details of the low-level API.
3. The game’s state machine
The entire lifecycle of a match is resolved with three states, following the same pattern that
already organized the level transitions in the Part IX project:
// inc/game.h
#ifndef GAME_H
#define GAME_H
#include <genesis.h>
enum GameStates {
STATE_MENU,
STATE_PLAYING,
STATE_GAME_OVER
};
#define WINNING_SCORE 5
459

=== PAGE 466 ===
extern u8 current_state;
extern u8 player_score;
extern u8 cpu_score;
extern u16 high_score;
void game_init(void);
void game_update(void);
#endif // GAME_H
// src/game.c
#include "game.h"
#include "paddle.h"
#include "ball.h"
#include "save.h"
u8 current_state = STATE_MENU;
u8 player_score = 0;
u8 cpu_score = 0;
u16 high_score = 0;
void game_init(void) {
high_score = load_high_score();
VDP_drawText("BOINGMD", 16, 10);
VDP_drawText("PRESS START", 12, 13);
}
static void start_new_match(void) {
player_score = 0;
cpu_score = 0;
VDP_clearTextArea(0, 0, 40, 28);
paddle_reset();
ball_reset();
current_state = STATE_PLAYING;
}
static void end_match(void) {
current_state = STATE_GAME_OVER;
if (player_score > high_score) {
high_score = player_score;
save_high_score(high_score);
}
char buffer[20];
sprintf(buffer, "HIGH SCORE: %d", high_score);
VDP_drawText("GAME OVER", 11, 10);
VDP_drawText(buffer, 14, 12);
VDP_drawText("PRESS START", 12, 15);
460

=== PAGE 467 ===
}
void game_update(void) {
switch (current_state) {
case STATE_MENU:
// Just waits for the Start button, handled in joyEvent()
break;
case STATE_PLAYING:
paddle_update();
ball_update();
if (player_score >= WINNING_SCORE || cpu_score >= WINNING_SCORE) {
end_match();
}
break;
case STATE_GAME_OVER:
// Just waits for the Start button, handled in joyEvent()
break;
}
}
void joyEvent(u16 joy, u16 changed, u16 state) {
if (changed & state & BUTTON_START) {
if (current_state == STATE_MENU || current_state == STATE_GAME_OVER) {
start_new_match();
}
}
}
With just three states and a simple win condition, this machine is enough to give the game
a sense of a complete match, with a clear beginning and end—something the Part IX project
deliberately left unresolved.
4. The paddles: sprites, human control, and an AI with a
margin of error
Each paddle is a vertical sprite with movement restricted to the Y axis, within a range that
keeps it from leaving the screen:
// inc/paddle.h
#ifndef PADDLE_H
#define PADDLE_H
#include <genesis.h>
#define PADDLE_SPEED FIX32(2)
#define PADDLE_MIN_Y 16
#define PADDLE_MAX_Y 192
extern Sprite *player_paddle;
461

=== PAGE 468 ===
extern Sprite *cpu_paddle;
extern fix32 player_y;
extern fix32 cpu_y;
void paddle_reset(void);
void paddle_update(void);
#endif // PADDLE_H
// src/paddle.c
#include "paddle.h"
#include "ball.h"
#include "resources.h"
Sprite *player_paddle;
Sprite *cpu_paddle;
fix32 player_y;
fix32 cpu_y;
void paddle_reset(void) {
player_y = FIX32(104);
cpu_y = FIX32(104);
player_paddle = SPR_addSprite(&paddle_sprite, 16, 96,
TILE_ATTR(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
cpu_paddle = SPR_addSprite(&paddle_sprite, 296, 96,
TILE_ATTR(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
}
static void move_player(void) {
u16 joy_state = JOY_readJoypad(JOY_1);
if (joy_state & BUTTON_UP) player_y -= PADDLE_SPEED;
if (joy_state & BUTTON_DOWN) player_y += PADDLE_SPEED;
if (player_y < FIX32(PADDLE_MIN_Y)) player_y = FIX32(PADDLE_MIN_Y);
if (player_y > FIX32(PADDLE_MAX_Y)) player_y = FIX32(PADDLE_MAX_Y);
SPR_setPosition(player_paddle, 16, F32_toInt(player_y));
}
// Chases the ball's height with a deliberate margin of error,
// so the AI isn't impossible to beat
static void move_cpu(void) {
fix32 target_y = ball_get_y();
fix32 error_margin = FIX32(6);
if (cpu_y + error_margin < target_y) cpu_y += PADDLE_SPEED;
else if (cpu_y - error_margin > target_y) cpu_y -= PADDLE_SPEED;
if (cpu_y < FIX32(PADDLE_MIN_Y)) cpu_y = FIX32(PADDLE_MIN_Y);
if (cpu_y > FIX32(PADDLE_MAX_Y)) cpu_y = FIX32(PADDLE_MAX_Y);
462

=== PAGE 469 ===
SPR_setPosition(cpu_paddle, 296, F32_toInt(cpu_y));
}
void paddle_update(void) {
move_player();
move_cpu();
}
The AI’s margin of error (error_margin) is the most important piece of this section: without
it, an AI chasing the ball with perfect precision would, in practice, be unbeatable. Adjusting
that single value together with PADDLE_SPEED is the most direct way to calibrate the game’s
difficultywithouttouchinganyotherpartofthecode. Theunderlyingprinciplecanbereused
inanyprojectofyourown: isolatebalancevaluesinnamedconstants,ratherthanscattering
them as magic numbers throughout the logic.
5. The ball: movement, bouncing, and collision with the
paddles
The ball moves in a straight line until it hits something, at which point it reverses the cor-
responding component of its velocity, applying the same kind of AABB collision seen in Part
VII:
// src/ball.c
#include "ball.h"
#include "paddle.h"
#include "game.h"
#include "resources.h"
#include "sfx.h"
static Sprite *ball_sprite_obj;
static fix32 ball_x, ball_y;
static fix32 ball_vel_x, ball_vel_y;
void ball_reset(void) {
ball_x = FIX32(160);
ball_y = FIX32(112);
ball_vel_x = FIX32(1.5);
ball_vel_y = FIX32(1);
ball_sprite_obj = SPR_addSprite(&ball_sprite, F32_toInt(ball_x),
F32_toInt(ball_y), TILE_ATTR(PAL0, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE));
}
fix32 ball_get_y(void) {
return ball_y;
}
static bool check_paddle_collision(fix32 paddle_x, fix32 paddle_y) {
bool overlap_x = (ball_x + FIX32(8) > paddle_x) && (ball_x < paddle_x +
↪ FIX32(4));
bool overlap_y = (ball_y + FIX32(8) > paddle_y) && (ball_y < paddle_y +
↪ FIX32(32));
463

=== PAGE 470 ===
return overlap_x && overlap_y;
}
void ball_update(void) {
ball_x += ball_vel_x;
ball_y += ball_vel_y;
// Bounce off the ceiling and floor
if (ball_y <= FIX32(16) || ball_y >= FIX32(216)) {
ball_vel_y = -ball_vel_y;
SND_startPlay_PCM(&bounce_sfx, SOUND_PCM_CH_AUTO);
}
// Bounce off the player's paddle
if (ball_vel_x < 0 && check_paddle_collision(FIX32(16), player_y)) {
ball_vel_x = -ball_vel_x;
SND_startPlay_PCM(&bounce_sfx, SOUND_PCM_CH_AUTO);
}
// Bounce off the AI's paddle
if (ball_vel_x > 0 && check_paddle_collision(FIX32(296), cpu_y)) {
ball_vel_x = -ball_vel_x;
SND_startPlay_PCM(&bounce_sfx, SOUND_PCM_CH_AUTO);
}
// Point for the AI: the ball crossed the left edge
if (ball_x < FIX32(0)) {
cpu_score++;
SND_startPlay_PCM(&score_sfx, SOUND_PCM_CH_AUTO);
ball_reset();
}
// Point for the player: the ball crossed the right edge
if (ball_x > FIX32(320)) {
player_score++;
SND_startPlay_PCM(&score_sfx, SOUND_PCM_CH_AUTO);
ball_reset();
}
SPR_setPosition(ball_sprite_obj, F32_toInt(ball_x), F32_toInt(ball_y));
}
Every bounce—off the ceiling, the floor, or a paddle—triggers the same short sound
effect (bounce_sfx), played with SND_startPlay_PCM() on a free channel indicated with
SOUND_PCM_CH_AUTO, while scoring a point triggers a different effect (score_sfx), following
the rescomp mechanism for declaring both resources already covered in Part VI:
// res/resources.res
SPRITE paddle_sprite "sprites/paddle.png" 4 32 FAST
SPRITE ball_sprite "sprites/ball.png" 8 8 FAST
WAV bounce_sfx "sounds/bounce.wav" XGM
WAV score_sfx "sounds/score.wav" XGM
464

=== PAGE 471 ===
6. The HUD: on-screen score without additional sprites
With the player and the AI now scoring points, they still need to be shown on screen. Fol-
lowing the suggestion at the close of Part IX, this game’s HUD is resolved entirely with text
over a background plane, without any sprites of its own, thereby avoiding any conflict with
SPR_reset() or other sprite operations in the game:
// Inside game_update(), called once per frame during STATE_PLAYING
static void update_hud(void) {
char score_text[10];
sprintf(score_text, "%d - %d", player_score, cpu_score);
VDP_drawText(score_text, 18, 2);
}
Updating the HUD every frame, instead of only when the score changes, is needlessly costly
when viewed with the same criteria from Part VIII on profiling: update_hud() is best called
only inside ball_update(), right after incrementing player_score or cpu_score, and not on
every pass of the main loop.
7. Saving the high score
save.c isolates all interaction with SRAM behind two simple functions, directly applying the
save mechanism with integrity checking explained in the previous chapter:
// src/save.c
#include "save.h"
#define SAVE_MAGIC 0x42 // Control value to detect uninitialized SRAM
u16 load_high_score(void) {
SRAM_enable();
u8 magic = SRAM_readByte(0);
u16 score = 0;
if (magic == SAVE_MAGIC) {
score = SRAM_readWord(1);
}
SRAM_disable();
return score;
}
void save_high_score(u16 score) {
SRAM_enable();
SRAM_writeByte(0, SAVE_MAGIC);
SRAM_writeWord(1, score);
SRAM_disable();
}
If SRAM_readByte(0)doesnotreturntheexpectedcontrolvalue,load_high_score()assumes
theSRAMwasneverwrittenbythisgame—forexample,thefirsttimeitrunsonanewconsole
oranewemulator—andreturnsahighscoreofzeroinsteadofameaninglessvaluereadfrom
uninitialized memory.
465

=== PAGE 472 ===
8. main.c: bringing all the pieces together
// src/main.c
#include <genesis.h>
#include "game.h"
#include "paddle.h"
#include "ball.h"
int main(bool hard_reset) {
JOY_init();
JOY_setEventHandler(joyEvent);
SPR_init();
game_init();
while (TRUE) {
game_update();
SPR_update();
SYS_doVBlankProcess();
}
return 0;
}
Compared to what it would have been to write the entire game inside a single file without
the organization presented throughout this manual, main.c ends up being very short in this
finished project: each responsibility—game state, paddles, ball, saving—lives in its own pair
of files, and main.c is limited to initializing the hardware once and delegating the rest to the
functions exposed by each module.
9. What’s deliberately left out
BOINGMD is a playable game, but it does not aim to be an example of every technique in
this manual: it does not use queued DMA because its graphical resources are minimal and it
doesn’t need it, it has no multiple levels and doesn’t require the level catalog from Part IX,
and its AI is deliberately simple because a fixed margin of error is enough for a Pong design.
Each of these omissions is a design decision, not a technical limitation: the tools for solving
more complex problems—queued DMA, data catalogs, function pointers for more elaborate
AI—are already documented in earlier parts of this manual, ready to be applied the day a
project of your own needs them.
Review exercises
1. Modify error_margin in move_cpu() and play several matches with different values. De-
scribe how the perceived difficulty changes and at what point the AI stops being a rea-
sonable challenge.
2. check_paddle_collision()usesthesamepaddledimensions(4×32pixels)forbothplay-
ers. What would you change in the code if you wanted the human player’s paddle to be
narrower than the AI’s, as an additional difficulty mechanism?
3. Explain why update_hud() is called only when the score changes and not on every pass
of the main loop, relating your answer to what was covered in Part VIII on profiling and
466

=== PAGE 473 ===
frame budget.
4. What would happen if load_high_score() did not check the SAVE_MAGIC value before
reading the saved score? Describe a concrete scenario in which this check prevents an
error visible to the player.
5. Propose a concrete extension for BOINGMD (for example, a second human player, a
power-up that speeds up the ball, or a pause screen) and describe, in broad strokes,
which files in the project you would need to touch to implement it.
467

=== PAGE 474 ===
Note on the Use of Audiovisual
Material
This manual is distributed freely and free of charge, without any commercial purpose, and
may be copied, modified, and redistributed by anyone who wishes to do so.
Several of the screenshots illustrating the chapters on graphics, sprites, sound, collision
physics,andtheaction-gamecapstoneprojectcomefromthevideoseriesPigsy’sRetroGame
DevTutorials,creditedandlinkedintheAcknowledgmentssection. Thesescreenshotsarein-
cludedsolelyforeducationalpurposes, inisolatedfragmentsthatillustrateconceptsalready
explainedinthetext,withouteversubstitutingfortheoriginalvideocontentorimplyingthat
its author participated in, endorsed, or sponsored the creation of this manual.
Repeated attempts were made, through different channels, to obtain the author’s express
authorization to use this material prior to publishing this manual, without receiving a re-
sponse as of this edition. This manual will continue attempting that contact, and the Ac-
knowledgmentssectionincludestheofficialchannelsofPigsy’sRetroGameDevTutorialsfor
anyone who wants to learn more about the original work, follow it, or support it directly.
If the author of that material, or anyone else whose work is reflected in this manual,
believes that a particular screenshot should not be included, or would prefer a different
form of attribution, they may request its removal or modification by writing to gustavovalen-
zuela.dev@gmail.com; the request will be honored and that part of the content will be with-
drawn or adjusted in the manual’s next revision.
468

